Circular CSSF 20/750
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828
and CSSF 25/881
on requirements regarding
information and
communication technology
(ICT) and security risk
management
Circular CSSF 20/750
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
on requirements regarding information and communication
technology (ICT) and security risk management
To support PFS and specialised PFS within the meaning of the Law of 5 April 1993 on the financial
sector (LFS), POST Luxembourg governed by the Law of 15 December 2000 on postal financial
services1, as well as to all branches in Luxembourg of credit institutions, investment firms, payment
institutions and e-money institutions incorporated in a third country
Luxembourg, 25 August 2020
Ladies and Gentlemen,
This circular reflects the expectations of the CSSF as regards the risk management measures and
control and security arrangements as referred to in Articles 17(1a) and 36(1) of the Law of 5 April
1993 on the financial sector (“LFS”) and in Article 105-1 (1) of the Law of 10 November 2009 on
payment services (“LPS”).
This circular is divided in four Chapters:
• Chapter 1 indicates the scope of this circular
• Chapter 2 provides definitions and clarifications with regards to the terms used in this circular
• Chapter 3 lists the requirements regarding to ICT and security risk management
• Chapter 4 indicates the entry into force of this circular
1 For the sake of clarity, the wording “postal financial services” has the meaning provided for in Article 1 of the
Law of 15 December 2000 as amended.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 2/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1. Entities in Scope ........................................................................................... 4
Chapter 2. Definitions .................................................................................................... 4
Chapter 3. Guidelines on ICT and security risk management .............................................. 6
3.1. Proportionality .......................................................................................... 6
3.2. Governance and strategy ........................................................................... 6
3.3. ICT and security risk management framework .............................................. 7
3.4. Information security ................................................................................ 10
3.5. ICT operations management .................................................................... 14
3.6. ICT project and change management ........................................................ 16
3.7. Business continuity management .............................................................. 17
Chapter 4. Date of application ...................................................................................... 20
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 3/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
Chapter 1. Entities in Scope
This circular is applicable in full to all the following entities:
a) All support PFS within the meaning of the Law of 5 April 1993 on the financial sector (LFS)
b) All specialised PSF within the meaning of the Law of 5 April 1993 on the financial sector (LFS)
c) POST Luxembourg governed by the Law of 15 December 2000 on postal financial services2 and
as Payment Service Provider as referred to in Article 1(37)(iii) of the LPS
d) All branches in Luxembourg of credit institutions incorporated in a third country
e) All branches in Luxembourg of investment firms incorporated in a third country
f) All branches in Luxembourg of payment institutions and electronic money institutions
incorporated in a third country
Chapter 2. Definitions
Financial Institution Throughout this document this term refers to the
supervised entities in scope of this circular as defined in
Chapter 1.
Payment Service Provider (PSP) Throughout this document this term refers to POST
Luxembourg and branches in Luxembourg of credit
institutions, payment institutions and electronic money
institutions incorporated in a third country, when they
provide payment services as defined in Article 1(38) of
the LPS.
ICT and security risk Risk of loss due to breach of confidentiality, failure of
integrity of systems and data, inappropriateness or
unavailability of systems and data or inability to change
information technology (IT) within a reasonable time and
with reasonable costs when the environment or business
requirements change (i.e. agility). This includes security
risks resulting from inadequate or failed internal
processes or external events including cyber-attacks or
inadequate physical security.
Management body A Financial Institution’s body or bodies, which are
appointed in accordance with national law, which are
empowered to set the Financial Institution’s strategy,
objectives and overall direction, and which oversee and
monitor management decision-making and include the
persons who effectively direct the business of the
Financial Institution and the directors and persons
responsible for the management of the Financial
Institution.
2 For the sake of clarity, the wording “postal financial services” has the meaning provided for in Article 1 of the
Law of 15 December 2000 as amended.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 4/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
In accordance with relevant circulars CSSF as applicable,
the term management body encompasses the notions of
authorised management, board of directors/or board of
managers and/or supervisory board and executive
board.
Operational or security incident A singular event or a series of linked events unplanned
by the financial institution that has or will probably have
an adverse impact on the integrity, availability,
confidentiality and/or authenticity of services.
Risk appetite The aggregate level and types of risk that the PSPs and
institutions are willing to assume within their risk
capacity, in line with their business model, to achieve
their strategic objectives.
ICT projects Any project, or part thereof, where ICT systems and
services are changed, replaced, dismissed or
implemented. ICT projects can be part of wider ICT or
business transformation programmes.
Third party An organisation that has entered into business
relationships or contracts with an entity to provide a
product or service.
Information asset A collection of information, either tangible or intangible,
that is worth protecting.
ICT asset An asset of either software or hardware that is found in
the business environment.
ICT systems ICT set-up as part of a mechanism or an interconnecting
network that supports the operations of a financial
institution.
ICT services means digital and data services provided through ICT
systems to one or more internal or external users on an
ongoing basis, including hardware as a service and
hardware services which includes the provision of
technical support via software or firmware updates by
the hardware provider, excluding traditional analogue
telephone services. 3
3 Definition from Article 3(21) of Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
14 December 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector and amending Regulations (EC) No
1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011 (“DORA”)
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 5/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
Chapter 3. Guidelines on ICT and security risk management
3.1. Proportionality
1. All financial institutions should comply with the provisions set out in these guidelines in such a
way that is proportionate to, and takes account of, the financial institutions’ size, their internal
organisation, and the nature, scope, complexity and riskiness of the services and products that
the financial institutions provide or intend to provide.
3.2. Governance and strategy
3.2.1. Governance
2. The management body should ensure that financial institutions have adequate internal
governance and internal control framework in place for their ICT and security risks. The
management body should set clear roles and responsibilities for ICT functions, information
security risk management, and business continuity, including those for the management body
and its committees.
3. The management body should ensure that the quantity and skills of financial institutions’ staff
is adequate to support their ICT operational needs and their ICT and security risk management
processes on an ongoing basis and to ensure the implementation of their ICT strategy. The
management body should ensure that the allocated budget is appropriate to fulfil the above.
Furthermore, financial institutions should ensure that all staff members, including key function
holders, receive appropriate training on ICT and security risks, including on information security,
on an annual basis, or more frequently if required (see also Section 3.4.7.)
4. The management body has overall accountability for setting, approving and overseeing the
implementation of financial institutions’ ICT strategy as part of their overall business strategy as
well as for the establishment of an effective risk management framework for ICT and security
risks.
3.2.2. Strategy
5. The ICT strategy should be aligned with financial institutions’ overall business strategy and
should define:
a. How financial institutions’ ICT should evolve to effectively support and participate in their
business strategy, including the evolution of the organisational structure, ICT system
changes and key dependencies with third parties;
b. The planned strategy and evolution of the architecture of ICT, including third-party
dependencies;
c. Clear information security objectives, focusing on ICT systems and ICT services, staff
and processes
6. Financial institutions should establish sets of action plans that contain measures to be taken to
achieve the objective of the ICT strategy. These should be communicated to all relevant staff
(including contractors and third-party providers where applicable and relevant). The action plans
should be periodically reviewed to ensure their relevance and appropriateness. Financial
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 6/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
institutions should also establish processes to monitor and measure the effectiveness of the
implementation of their ICT strategy.
3.2.3. Use of third-party providers
7. Without prejudice to Circular CSSF 22/806 on outsourcing arrangements , financial institutions
should ensure the effectiveness of the risk-mitigating measures as defined by their risk
management framework, including the measures set out in these guidelines, when operational
functions of payment services and/or ICT services and ICT systems of any activity are
outsourced, including to group entities, or when using third parties.
8. To ensure continuity of ICT services and ICT systems, financial institutions should ensure that
contracts and service level agreements (both for normal circumstances as well as in the event
of service disruption- see also section 3.7.2.) with providers (outsourcing providers, group
entities, or third-party providers) include the following:
a. Appropriate and proportionate information security-related objectives and measures
including requirements such as minimum cybersecurity requirements; specifications of
the financial institution’s data life cycle; any requirements regarding data encryption,
network security and security monitoring processes, and the location of data centres;
b. Operational and security incident handling procedures including escalation and reporting.
9. Financial institutions should monitor and seek assurance on the level of compliance of these
providers with the security objectives, measures and performance targets of the financial
institution.
3.3. ICT and security risk management framework
3.3.1. Organisation and objectives
10. Financial institutions should identify and manage their ICT and security risks. The ICT function(s)
in charge of ICT systems, processes and security operations should have appropriate processes
and controls in place to ensure that all risks are identified, analysed, measured, monitored,
managed, reported and kept within the limits of the financial institution’s risk appetite and that
the projects and systems they deliver and the activities they perform are in compliance with
external and internal requirements.
11. Financial institutions should assign the responsibility for managing and overseeing ICT and
security risks to a control function. Financial institutions should ensure the independence and
objectivity of this control function by appropriately segregating it from ICT operations processes.
This control function should be directly accountable to the management body and responsible
for monitoring and controlling adherence to the ICT and security risk management framework.
It should ensure that ICT and security risks are identified, measured, assessed, managed,
monitored and reported. Financial institutions should ensure that this control function is not
responsible for any internal audit.
The internal audit function should, following a risk-based approach, have the capacity to
independently review and provide objective assurance of the compliance of all ICT and security-
related activities and units of a financial institutions with the financial institution’s policies and
procedures and with external requirements.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 7/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
12. Financial institutions should define and assign key roles and responsibilities, and relevant
reporting lines, for the ICT and security risk management framework to be effective. This
framework should be fully integrated into, and aligned with, financial institutions’ overall risk
management processes.
13. The ICT and security risk management framework should include processes in place to:
a. Determine the risk appetite for ICT and security risks, in accordance with the risk
appetite of the financial institution;
b. Identify and assess the ICT and security risks to which a financial institution is exposed;
c. Define mitigation measures, including controls, to mitigate ICT and security risks;
d. Monitor the effectiveness of these measures as well as the number of reported incidents,
including for PSPs the incidents reported in accordance with Article 105-2 of LPS affecting
the ICT-related activities, and take action to correct the measures where necessary;
e. Report to the management body on the ICT and security risks and controls;
f. Identify and assess whether there are any ICT and security risks resulting from any
major change in ICT system or ICT services, processes or procedures, and/or after any
significant operational or security incident.
14. Financial institutions should ensure that the ICT and security risk management framework is
documented, and continuously improved, based on “lessons learned” during its implementation
and monitoring. The ICT and security risk management framework should be approved and
reviewed, at least once a year, by the management body.
3.3.2. Identification of functions, processes and assets
15. Financial institutions should identify, establish and maintain updated mapping of their business
functions, roles and supporting processes to identify the importance of each and their
interdependencies related to ICT and security risks.
16. In addition, financial institutions should identify, establish and maintain updated mapping of the
information assets supporting their business functions and supporting processes, such as ICT
systems, staff, contractors, third parties and dependencies on other internal and external
systems and processes, to be able to, at least, manage the information assets that support their
critical business functions and processes.
3.3.3. Classification and risk assessment
17. Financial institutions should classify the identified business functions, supporting processes and
information assets referred to in paragraphs 15 and 16 in terms of criticality.
18. To define the criticality of these identified business functions, supporting processes and
information assets, financial institutions should, at a minimum, consider the confidentiality,
integrity and availability requirements. There should be clearly assigned accountability and
responsibility for the information assets.
19. Financial institutions should review the adequacy of the classification of the information assets
and relevant documentation, when risk assessment is performed.
20. Financial institutions should identify the ICT and security risks that impact the identified and
classified business functions, supporting processes and information assets, according to their
criticality. This risk assessment should be carried out and documented annually or at shorter
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 8/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
intervals if required. Such risk assessments should also be performed on any major changes in
infrastructure, processes or procedures affecting the business functions, supporting processes
or information assets, and consequently the current risk assessment of financial institutions
should be updated.
21. Financial institutions should ensure that they continuously monitor threats and vulnerabilities
relevant to their business processes, supporting functions and information assets and should
regularly review the risk scenarios impacting them.
3.3.4. Risk mitigation
22. Based on the risk assessments, financial institutions should determine which measures are
required to mitigate identified ICT and security risks to acceptable levels and whether changes
are necessary to the existing business processes, control measures, ICT systems and ICT
services. A financial institution should consider the time required to implement these changes
and the time to take appropriate interim mitigating measures to minimise ICT and security risks
to stay within the financial institution’s ICT and security risk appetite.
23. Financial institutions should define and implement measures to mitigate identified ICT and
security risks and to protect information assets in accordance with their classification.
3.3.5. Reporting
24. Financial institutions should report risk assessment results to the management body in a clear
and timely manner. Such reporting is without prejudice to the obligation of PSPs to provide
competent authorities with an updated and comprehensive risk assessment, as laid down in
Article 105-1(2) of LPS.
3.3.6. Audit
25. A financial institution’s governance, systems and processes for its ICT and security risks should
be audited on a periodic basis by auditors with sufficient knowledge, skills and expertise in ICT
and security risks and in payments (for PSPs) to provide independent assurance of their
effectiveness to the management body. The auditors should be independent within or from the
financial institution. The frequency and focus of such audits should be commensurate with the
relevant ICT and security risks.
26. A financial institution’s management body should approve the audit plan, including any ICT
audits and any material modifications thereto. The audit plan and its execution, including the
audit frequency, should reflect and be proportionate to the inherent ICT and security risks in the
financial institution and should be updated regularly.
27. A formal follow-up process including provisions for the timely verification and remediation of
critical ICT audit findings should be established.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 9/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
3.4. Information security
3.4.1. Information security policy
28. Financial institutions should develop and document an information security policy that should
define the high-level principles and rules to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability
of financial institutions’ and their customers’ data and information. The information security
policy should be in line with the financial institution’s information security objectives and based
on the relevant results of the risk assessment process. The policy should be approved by the
management body.
29. The policy should include a description of the main roles and responsibilities of information
security management, and it should set out the requirements for staff and contractors, processes
and technology in relation to information security, recognising that staff and contractors at all
levels have responsibilities in ensuring financial institutions’ information security. The policy
should ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of a financial institution’s critical
logical and physical assets, resources and sensitive data whether at rest, in transit or in use.
The information security policy should be communicated to all staff and contractors of the
financial institution.
30. Based on the information security policy, financial institutions should establish and implement
security measures to mitigate the ICT and security risks that they are exposed to. These
measures should include:
a. organisation and governance in accordance with paragraphs 10 and 11;
b. logical security (Section 3.4.2);
c. physical security (Section 3.4.3);
d. ICT operations security (Section 3.4.4);
e. security monitoring (Section 3.4.5);
f. information security reviews, assessment and testing (Section 3.4.6);
g. information security training and awareness (Section 3.4.7).
3.4.2. Logical security
31. Financial institutions should define, document and implement procedures for logical access
control (identity and access management). These procedures should be implemented, enforced,
monitored and periodically reviewed. The procedures should also include controls for monitoring
anomalies. These procedures should, at a minimum, implement the following elements, where
the term ‘user’ also includes technical users:
a. Need to know, least privilege and segregation of duties: financial institutions
should manage access rights to information assets and their supporting systems on a
‘need-to-know’ basis, including for remote access. Users should be granted minimum
access rights that are strictly required to execute their duties (principle of ‘least
privilege’), i.e. to prevent unjustified access to a large set of data or to prevent the
allocation of combinations of access rights that may be used to circumvent controls
(principle of ‘segregation of duties’).
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 10/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
b. User accountability: financial institutions should limit, as much as possible, the use of
generic and shared user accounts and ensure that users can be identified for the actions
performed in the ICT systems.
c. Privileged access rights: financial institutions should implement strong controls over
privileged system access by strictly limiting and closely supervising accounts with
elevated system access entitlements (e.g. administrator accounts). In order to ensure
secure communication and reduce risk, remote administrative access to critical ICT
systems should be granted only on a need-to-know basis and when strong authentication
solutions are used.
d. Logging of user activities: at a minimum, all activities by privileged users should be
logged and monitored. Access logs should be secured to prevent unauthorised
modification or deletion and retained for a period commensurate with the criticality of
the identified business functions, supporting processes and information assets, in
accordance with Section 3.3.3, without prejudice to the retention requirements set out
in EU and national law. A financial institution should use this information to facilitate the
identification and investigation of anomalous activities that have been detected in the
provision of services.
e. Access management: access rights should be granted, withdrawn or modified in a
timely manner, according to predefined approval workflows that involve the business
owner of the information being accessed (information asset owner). In the case of
termination of employment, access rights should be promptly withdrawn.
f. Access recertification: access rights should be periodically reviewed to ensure that
users do not possess excessive privileges and that access rights are withdrawn when no
longer required.
g. Authentication methods: financial institutions should enforce authentication methods
that are sufficiently robust to adequately and effectively ensure that access control
policies and procedures are complied with. Authentication methods should be
commensurate with the criticality of ICT systems, information or the process being
accessed. This should, at a minimum, include complex passwords or stronger
authentication methods (such as two-factor authentication), based on relevant risk.
32. Electronic access by applications to data and ICT systems should be limited to a minimum
required to provide the relevant service.
3.4.3. Physical security
33. Financial institutions’ physical security measures should be defined, documented and
implemented to protect their premises, data centres and sensitive areas from unauthorised
access and from environmental hazards.
34. Physical access to ICT systems should be permitted to only authorised individuals. Authorisation
should be assigned in accordance with the individual’s tasks and responsibilities and limited to
individuals who are appropriately trained and monitored. Physical access should be regularly
reviewed to ensure that unnecessary access rights are promptly revoked when not required.
35. Adequate measures to protect from environmental hazards should be commensurate with the
importance of the buildings and the criticality of the operations or ICT systems located in these
buildings.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 11/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
3.4.4. ICT operations security
36. Financial institutions should implement procedures to prevent the occurrence of security issues
in ICT systems and ICT services and should minimise their impact on ICT service delivery. These
procedures should include the following measures:
a. identification of potential vulnerabilities, which should be evaluated and remediated by
ensuring that software and firmware are up to date, including the software provided by
financial institutions to their internal and external users, by deploying critical security
patches or by implementing compensating controls;
b. implementation of secure configuration baselines of all network components;
c. implementation of network segmentation, data loss prevention systems and the
encryption of network traffic (in accordance with the data classification);
d. implementation of protection of endpoints including servers, workstations and mobile
devices; financial institutions should evaluate whether endpoints meet the security
standards defined by them before they are granted access to the corporate network;
e. ensuring that mechanisms are in place to verify the integrity of software, firmware and
data;
f. encryption of data at rest and in transit (in accordance with the data classification).
37. Furthermore, on an ongoing basis, financial institutions should determine whether changes in
the existing operational environment influence the existing security measures or require
adoption of additional measures to mitigate related risks appropriately. These changes should
be part of the financial institutions’ formal change management process, which should ensure
that changes are properly planned, tested, documented, authorised and deployed.
3.4.5. Security monitoring
38. Financial institutions should establish and implement policies and procedures to detect
anomalous activities that may impact financial institutions’ information security and to respond
to these events appropriately. As part of this continuous monitoring, financial institutions should
implement appropriate and effective capabilities for detecting and reporting physical or logical
intrusion as well as breaches of confidentiality, integrity and availability of the information
assets. The continuous monitoring and detection processes should cover:
a. relevant internal and external factors, including business and ICT administrative
functions;
b. transactions to detect misuse of access by third parties or other entities and internal
misuse of access;
c. potential internal and external threats.
39. Financial institutions should establish and implement processes and organisation structures to
identify and constantly monitor security threats that could materially affect their abilities to
provide services. Financial institutions should actively monitor technological developments to
ensure that they are aware of security risks. Financial institutions should implement detective
measures, for instance to identify possible information leakages, malicious code and other
security threats, and publicly known vulnerabilities in software and hardware and should check
for corresponding new security updates.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 12/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
40. The security monitoring process should also help a financial institution to understand the nature
of operational or security incidents, to identify trends and to support the organisation’s
investigations.
3.4.6. Information security reviews, assessment and testing
41. Financial institutions should perform a variety of information security reviews, assessments and
testing to ensure the effective identification of vulnerabilities in their ICT systems and ICT
services. For instance, financial institutions may perform gap analysis against information
security standards, compliance reviews, internal and external audits of the information systems,
or physical security reviews. Furthermore, the institution should consider good practices such as
source code reviews, vulnerability assessments, penetration tests and red team exercises.
42. Financial institutions should establish and implement an information security testing framework
that validates the robustness and effectiveness of their information security measures and
ensure that this framework considers threats and vulnerabilities, identified through threat
monitoring and ICT and security risk assessment process.
43. The information security testing framework should ensure that tests:
a. are carried out by independent testers with sufficient knowledge, skills and expertise in
testing information security measures and who are not involved in the development of
the information security measures;
b. include vulnerability scans and penetration tests (including threat-led penetration testing
where necessary and appropriate) commensurate to the level of risk identified with the
business processes and systems.
44. Financial institutions should perform ongoing and repeated tests of the security measures. For
all critical ICT systems (paragraph 17), these tests should be performed at least on an annual
basis and, for PSPs, they will be part of the comprehensive assessment of the security risks
related to the payment services they provide, in accordance with Article 105-1(2) of LPS. Non-
critical systems should be tested regularly using a risk-based approach, but at least every 3
years.
45. Financial institutions should ensure that tests of security measures are conducted in the event
of changes to infrastructure, processes or procedures and if changes are made because of major
operational or security incidents or due to the release of new or significantly changed internet-
facing critical applications.
46. Financial institutions should monitor and evaluate the results of the security tests and update
their security measures accordingly without undue delays in the case of critical ICT systems.
47. For PSPs, the testing framework should also encompass the security measures relevant to (1)
payment terminals and devices used for the provision of payment services, (2) payment
terminals and devices used for authenticating the payment service users (PSU), and (3) devices
and software provided by the PSP to the PSU to generate/receive an authentication code.
48. Based on the security threats observed and the changes made, testing should be performed to
incorporate scenarios of relevant and known potential attacks.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 13/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
3.4.7. Information security training and awareness
49. Financial institutions should establish a training programme, including periodic security
awareness programmes, for all staff and contractors to ensure that they are trained to perform
their duties and responsibilities consistent with the relevant security policies and procedures to
reduce human error, theft, fraud, misuse or loss and how to address information security-related
risks. Financial institutions should ensure that the training programme provides training for all
staff members and contractors at least annually.
3.5. ICT operations management
50. Financial institutions should manage their ICT operations based on documented and
implemented processes and procedures that are approved by the management body4. This set
of documents should define how financial institutions operate, monitor and control their ICT
systems and services, including the documenting of critical ICT operations and should enable
financial institutions to maintain up-to-date ICT asset inventory.
51. Financial institutions should ensure that performance of their ICT operations is aligned to their
business requirements. Financial institutions should maintain and improve, when possible,
efficiency of their ICT operations, including but not limited to the need to consider how to
minimise potential errors arising from the execution of manual tasks.
52. Financial institutions should implement logging and monitoring procedures for critical ICT
operations to allow the detection, analysis and correction of errors.
53. Financial institutions should maintain an up-to-date inventory of their ICT assets (including ICT
systems, network devices, databases, etc.). The ICT asset inventory should store the
configuration of the ICT assets and the links and interdependencies between the different ICT
assets, to enable a proper configuration and change management process.
54. The ICT asset inventory should be sufficiently detailed to enable the prompt identification of an
ICT asset, its location, security classification and ownership. Interdependencies between assets
should be documented to help in the response to security and operational incidents, including
cyber-attacks.
55. Financial institutions should monitor and manage the life cycles of ICT assets, to ensure that
they continue to meet and support business and risk management requirements. Financial
institutions should monitor whether their ICT assets are supported by their external or internal
vendors and developers and whether all relevant patches and upgrades are applied based on
documented processes. The risks stemming from outdated or unsupported ICT assets should be
assessed and mitigated.
56. Financial institutions should implement performance and capacity planning and monitoring
processes to prevent, detect and respond to important performance issues of ICT systems and
ICT capacity shortages in a timely manner.
57. Financial institutions should define and implement data and ICT systems backup and restoration
procedures to ensure that they can be recovered as required. The scope and frequency of
backups should be set out in line with business recovery requirements and the criticality of the
4 means “management body or authorised management as defined by the management body”
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 14/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
data and the ICT systems and evaluated according to the performed risk assessment. Testing of
the backup and restoration procedures should be undertaken on a periodic basis.
58. Financial institutions should ensure that data and ICT system backups are stored securely and
are sufficiently remote from the primary site so they are not exposed to the same risks.
3.5.1. ICT incident and problem management
59. Financial institutions should establish and implement an incident and problem management
process to monitor and log operational and security ICT incidents and to enable financial
institutions to continue or resume, in a timely manner, critical business functions and processes
when disruptions occur. Financial institutions should determine appropriate criteria and
thresholds for classifying events as operational or security incidents, as set out in the ‘Definitions’
section of this circular, as well as early warning indicators that should serve as alerts to enable
early detection of these incidents.
60. To minimise the impact of adverse events and enable timely recovery, financial institutions
should establish appropriate processes and organisational structures to ensure a consistent and
integrated monitoring, handling and follow-up of operational and security incidents and to make
sure that the root causes are identified and eliminated to prevent the occurrence of repeated
incidents. The incident and problem management process should establish:
a. the procedures to identify, track, log, categorise and classify incidents according to a
priority, based on business criticality;
b. the roles and responsibilities for different incident scenarios (e.g. errors, malfunctioning,
cyber-attacks);
c. problem management procedures to identify, analyse and solve the root cause behind
one or more incidents — a financial institution should analyse operational or security
incidents likely to affect the financial institution that have been identified or have
occurred within and/or outside the organisation and should consider key lessons learned
from these analyses and update the security measures accordingly;
d. effective internal communication plans, including incident notification and escalation
procedures — also covering security-related customer complaints — to ensure that:
i. incidents with a potentially high adverse impact on critical ICT systems
and ICT services are reported to the relevant senior management5 and
ICT senior management6;
ii. the management body is informed on an ad hoc basis in the event of
significant incidents and, at least, informed of the impact, the response
and the additional controls to be defined as a result of the incidents.
e. incident response procedures to mitigate the impacts related to the incidents and to
ensure that the service becomes operational and secure in a timely manner;
f. specific external communication plans for critical business functions and processes in
order to:
i. collaborate with relevant stakeholders to effectively respond to and
recover from the incident;
5 means “management”
6 means “management”
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 15/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
ii. provide timely information to external parties (e.g. customers, other
market participants, the supervisory authority) as appropriate and in line
with an applicable regulation.
3.6. ICT project and change management
3.6.1. ICT project management
61. A financial institution should implement a programme and/or a project governance process that
defines roles, responsibilities and accountabilities to effectively support the implementation of
the ICT strategy.
62. A financial institution should appropriately monitor and mitigate risks deriving from their portfolio
of ICT projects (programme management), considering also risks that may result from
interdependencies between different projects and from dependencies of multiple projects on the
same resources and/or expertise.
63. A financial institution should establish and implement an ICT project management policy that
includes as a minimum:
a. project objectives;
b. roles and responsibilities;
c. a project risk assessment;
d. a project plan, timeframe and steps;
e. key milestones;
f. change management requirements.
64. The ICT project management policy should ensure that information security requirements are
analysed and approved by a function that is independent from the development function.
65. A financial institution should ensure that all areas impacted by an ICT project are represented
in the project team and that the project team has the knowledge required to ensure secure and
successful project implementation.
66. The establishment and progress of ICT projects and their associated risks should be reported to
the management body, individually or in aggregation, depending on the importance and size of
the ICT projects, regularly and on an ad hoc basis as appropriate. Financial institutions should
include project risk in their risk management framework.
3.6.2. ICT systems acquisition and development
67. Financial institutions should develop and implement a process governing the acquisition,
development and maintenance of ICT systems. This process should be designed using a risk-
based approach.
68. A financial institution should ensure that, before any acquisition or development of ICT systems
takes place, the functional and non-functional requirements (including information security
requirements) are clearly defined and approved by the relevant business management.
69. A financial institution should ensure that measures are in place to mitigate the risk of
unintentional alteration or intentional manipulation of the ICT systems during development and
implementation in the production environment.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 16/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
70. Financial institutions should have a methodology in place for testing and approval of ICT systems
prior to their first use. This methodology should consider the criticality of business processes
and assets. The testing should ensure that new ICT systems perform as intended. They should
also use test environments that adequately reflect the production environment.
71. Financial institutions should test ICT systems, ICT services and information security measures
to identify potential security weaknesses, violations and incidents.
72. A financial institution should implement separate ICT environments to ensure adequate
segregation of duties and to mitigate the impact of unverified changes to production systems.
Specifically, a financial institution should ensure the segregation of production environments
from development, testing and other non-production environments. A financial institution should
ensure the integrity and confidentiality of production data in non-production environments.
Access to production data is restricted to authorised users.
73. Financial institutions should implement measures to protect the integrity of the source codes of
ICT systems that are developed in-house. They should also document the development,
implementation, operation and/or configuration of the ICT systems comprehensively to reduce
any unnecessary dependency on subject matter experts. The documentation of the ICT system
should contain, where applicable, at least user documentation, technical system documentation
and operating procedures.
74. A financial institution’s processes for acquisition and development of ICT systems should also
apply to ICT systems developed or managed by the business function’s end users outside the
ICT organisation (e.g. end user computing applications) using a risk-based approach. The
financial institution should maintain a register of these applications that support critical business
functions or processes.
3.6.3. ICT change management
75. Financial institutions should establish and implement an ICT change management process to
ensure that all changes to ICT systems are recorded, tested, assessed, approved, implemented
and verified in a controlled manner. Financial institutions should handle the changes during
emergencies (i.e. changes that must be introduced as soon as possible) following procedures
that provide adequate safeguards.
76. Financial institutions should determine whether changes in the existing operational environment
influence the existing security measures or require the adoption of additional measures to
mitigate the risks involved. These changes should be in accordance with the financial institutions’
formal change management process.
3.7. Business continuity management
77. Financial institutions should establish a sound business continuity management (BCM) process
to maximise their abilities to provide services on an ongoing basis and to limit losses in the event
of severe business disruption.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 17/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
3.7.1. Business impact analysis
78. As part of sound business continuity management, financial institutions should conduct business
impact analysis (BIA) by analysing their exposure to severe business disruptions and assessing
their potential impacts (including on confidentiality, integrity and availability), quantitatively and
qualitatively, using internal and/or external data (e.g. third-party provider data relevant to a
business process or publicly available data that may be relevant to the BIA) and scenario
analysis. The BIA should also consider the criticality of the identified and classified business
functions, supporting processes, third parties and information assets, and their
interdependencies, in accordance with Section 3.3.3.
79. Financial institutions should ensure that their ICT systems and ICT services are designed and
aligned with their BIA, for example with redundancy of certain critical components to prevent
disruptions caused by events impacting those components.
3.7.2. Business continuity planning
80. Based on their BIAs, financial institutions should establish plans to ensure business continuity
(business continuity plans, BCPs), which should be documented and approved by their
management bodies. The plans should specifically consider risks that could adversely impact ICT
systems and ICT services. The plans should support objectives to protect and, if necessary, re-
establish the confidentiality, integrity and availability of their business functions, supporting
processes and information assets. Financial institutions should coordinate with relevant internal
and external stakeholders, as appropriate, during the establishment of these plans.
81. Financial institutions should put BCPs in place to ensure that they can react appropriately to
potential failure scenarios and that they are able to recover the operations of their critical
business activities after disruptions within a recovery time objective (RTO, the maximum time
within which a system or process must be restored after an incident) and a recovery point
objective (RPO, the maximum time period during which it is acceptable for data to be lost in the
event of an incident). In cases of severe business disruption that trigger specific business
continuity plans, financial institutions should prioritise business continuity actions using risk-
based approach, which can be based on the risk assessments carried out under Section 3.3.3.
For PSPs this may include, for example, facilitating the further processing of critical transactions
while remediation efforts continue.
82. A financial institution should consider a range of different scenarios in its BCP, including extreme
but plausible ones to which it might be exposed, including a cyber-attack scenario, and it should
assess the potential impact that such scenarios might have. Based on these scenarios, a financial
institution should describe how the continuity of ICT systems and services, as well as the
financial institution’s information security, are ensured.
3.7.3. Response and recovery plans
83. Based on the BIAs (paragraph 78) and plausible scenarios (paragraph 82), financial institutions
should develop response and recovery plans. These plans should specify what conditions may
prompt activation of the plans and what actions should be taken to ensure the availability,
continuity and recovery of, at least, financial institutions’ critical ICT systems and ICT services.
The response and recovery plans should aim to meet the recovery objectives of financial
institutions’ operations.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 18/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
84. The response and recovery plans should consider both short-term and long-term recovery
options. The plans should:
a. focus on the recovery of the operations of critical business functions, supporting
processes, information assets and their interdependencies to avoid adverse effects on
the functioning of financial institutions and on the financial system, including on payment
systems and on payment service users, and to ensure execution of pending payment
transactions;
b. be documented and made available to the business and support units and readily
accessible in the event of an emergency;
c. be updated in line with lessons learned from incidents, tests, new risks identified and
threats, and changed recovery objectives and priorities.
85. The plans should also consider alternative options where recovery may not be feasible in the
short term because of costs, risks, logistics or unforeseen circumstances.
86. Furthermore, as part of the response and recovery plans, a financial institution should consider
and implement continuity measures to mitigate failures of third-party providers, which are of
key importance for a financial institution’s ICT service continuity (in line with the provisions of
the Circular CSSF 22/806 on outsourcing arrangements regarding business continuity plans).
3.7.4. Testing of plans
87. Financial institutions should test their BCPs periodically. In particular, they should ensure that
the BCPs of their critical business functions, supporting processes, information assets and their
interdependencies (including those provided by third parties, where applicable) are tested at
least annually, in accordance with paragraph 89.
88. BCPs should be updated at least annually, based on testing results, current threat intelligence
and lessons learned from previous events. Any changes in recovery objectives (including RTOs
and RPOs) and/or changes in business functions, supporting processes and information assets,
should also be considered, where relevant, as a basis for updating the BCPs.
89. Financial institutions’ testing of their BCPs should demonstrate that they are able to sustain the
viability of their businesses until critical operations are re-established. In particular they should:
a. include testing of an adequate set of severe but plausible scenarios including those
considered for the development of the BCPs (as well as testing of services provided by
third parties, where applicable); this should include the switch-over of critical business
functions, supporting processes and information assets to the disaster recovery
environment and demonstrating that they can be run in this way for a sufficiently
representative period of time and that normal functioning can be restored afterwards;
b. be designed to challenge the assumptions on which BCPs rest, including governance
arrangements and crisis communication plans; and
c. include procedures to verify the ability of their staff and contractors, ICT systems and
ICT services to respond adequately to the scenarios defined in paragraph 89(a).
90. Test results should be documented and any identified deficiencies resulting from the tests should
be analysed, addressed and reported to the management body.
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 19/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881
3.7.5. Crisis communication
91. In the event of a disruption or emergency, and during the implementation of the BCPs, financial
institutions should ensure that they have effective crisis communication measures in place so
that all relevant internal and external stakeholders, including the competent authorities when
required by national regulations, and also relevant providers (outsourcing providers, group
entities, or third-party providers) are informed in a timely and appropriate manner.
Chapter 4. Date of application
92. This circular shall apply with immediate effect.
Claude WAMPACH Marco ZWICK Jean-Pierre FABER
Director Director Director
Françoise KAUTHEN Claude MARX
Director Director General
CIRCULAR CSSF 20/750 20/20
as amended by Circulars CSSF 22/828 and CSSF 25/881