Circular CSSF
22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF
25/883
on outsourcing
arrangements
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
1/59
Circular CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
Re:on outsourcing arrangements
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Luxembourg, 22 April 2022
Supervised entities that fall under the scope of the Law of 5 April 1993 on the
To all credit institutions and financial sector (LFS) and of the Law of 10 November 2009 on payment services
professionals of the financial sector
(LPS) are required to adopt robust internal governance arrangements, which
within the meaning of the Law of 5
April 1993 on the financial sector shall include a clear organisational structure, adequate internal control
(LFS)
mechanisms, including sound administrative and accounting procedures and
To all payment institutions and practices allowing and promoting sound and effective risk management, as well
electronic money institutions within as control and security mechanisms for their IT systems.
the meaning of the Law of 10
November 2009 on payment The European Banking Authority (EBA) has issued revised Guidelines on
services (LPS)
outsourcing arrangements (EBA/GL/2019/02 or the Guidelines). The CSSF,
To all management companies in its capacity as competent authority, applies the Guidelines and consequently,
authorised only under Article 125-1
with a view to contribute to supervisory convergence at European level, has
of Chapter 16 of the Law of 17
December 2010 relating to integrated them into its administrative practice and regulatory approach.
undertakings for collective
investment (UCITS Law) While the Guidelines apply to credit institutions, investment firms and payment
and electronic money institutions only, the CSSF has chosen to extend the scope
of application of this circular in order to promote convergence on a national
level. All entities referred to under point 2 are expected to duly comply with this
circular, and to take implementing measures that are proportionate to the
nature, scale and complexity, including their risks, of their operations.
This circular complements the framework on internal governance arrangements
by specifying guiding principles and laying down additional detailed
requirements1 that supervised entities must observe when resorting to
outsourcing arrangements. Therefore, this circular shall be read together with
those relevant legal provisions2 and the circulars CSSF on central
administration, internal governance and risk management3 as applicable to
supervised entities.
This circular contains in one single document the supervisory requirements on
outsourcing arrangements related to information and communication
technology, that were previously disseminated in individual circulars.
1 Such precisions are provided in italics in Part I and III of the Circular.
2 Outsourcing arrangements shall at all times comply with the organisational requirements for outsourcing
in accordance with Articles 36-2 or 37-1(5) LFS and Articles 11(4) or 24-7(4) LPS, where applicable.
3 For example, Circular CSSF 12/552 for credit institutions and Circular CSSF 20/758 for investment firms.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
2/59
This circular is divided in three parts: the first part sets out the requirements in
relation to outsourcing arrangements and includes definitions, scope of
application, general principles and applicable governance requirements; the
second part is dedicated to specific requirements for ICT outsourcing
arrangements relying or not on a cloud computing infrastructure and the third
part provides for the entry into force of this circular.
As of 17 January 2025, the provisions of the Digital Operational Resilience Act
(DORA), Regulation (EU) 2022/2554, apply to all financial entities as defined
under Article 2(1), points (a) to (t) of DORA. This circular has therefore been
amended in order to provide legal clarity to the market and to avoid duplication
of requirements with the provisions set forth in DORA. This alignment reflects
the CSSF's continued commitment to ensuring the effective management of ICT
third-party risks within the financial sector while adhering to evolving European
regulatory frameworks.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
3/59
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Part I – Outsourcing arrangements 5
Chapter 1. Definitions, abbreviations and acronyms 5
Chapter 2. Scope of application and proportionality 9
Chapter 3. General principles governing outsourcing
arrangements and intragroup outsourcing 12
Sub-chapter 3.1 General principles governing outsourcing
arrangements 12
Sub-chapter 3.2 Intragroup outsourcing 14
Chapter 4. Governance of outsourcing arrangements 16
Sub-chapter 4.1 Assessment of outsourcing arrangements 16
Section 4.1.1 Outsourcing 16
Section 4.1.2 Critical or important functions 17
Section 4.1.3 Outsourcing arrangements relating to internal control
functions 19
Section 4.1.4 Outsourcing arrangements relating to the financial and
accounting function 20
Sub-Chapter 4.2 Governance framework 21
Section 4.2.1 Sound governance arrangements and third-party risk
Section 4.2.2 Sound governance arrangements for outsourcing 21
Section 4.2.3 Outsourcing policy 24
Section 4.2.4 Conflicts of interests 26
Section 4.2.5 Business continuity plans 26
Section 4.2.6 Internal audit function 27
Section 4.2.7 Documentation requirements 27
Section 4.2.8 Supervisory conditions for outsourcing 30
Sub-chapter 4.3 Outsourcing process 32
Section 4.3.1 Pre-outsourcing analysis 32
Section 4.3.2 Contractual phase 35
Section 4.3.3 Oversight of outsourced functions 42
Section 4.3.4 Exit plans 43
Part II – Requirements in the context of ICT outsourcing
arrangements 45
Chapter 1. ICT outsourcing arrangements other than those
relying on a cloud computing infrastructure 46
Sub-chapter 1.1 Requirements applicable to In-Scope Entities
other than Support PFS authorised under Articles 29-3, 29-5 and
29-6 LFS and their branches abroad 46
Sub-chapter 1.2 Requirements applicable to Support PFS
authorised under Articles 29-3, 29-5 and 29-6 LFS and their
branches abroad 47
Chapter 2. ICT outsourcing arrangements relying on a cloud
computing infrastructure 50
Sub-chapter 2.1 Definitions and application 50
Section 2.1.1 Specific terminology 50
Section 2.1.2 Definition of “cloud computing” 51
Section 2.1.3 Conditions of application of Chapter 2 52
Sub-chapter 2.2 Requirements to be observed with respect to
outsourcing to a cloud computing infrastructure 53
Part III – Date of application 58
Annex – List of implemented ESAs Guidelines 59
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
4/59
Part I – Outsourcing arrangements
Chapter 1. Definitions, abbreviations and acronyms
1. Unless otherwise specified, terms used and defined in the LFS, the LPS and
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 shall have the same meaning in this circular. In
addition, for the purposes of this circular, the following definitions apply:
Definitions:
1) Cloud services services provided using cloud computing, that
is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient,
on-demand network access to a shared pool of
configurable computing resources (e.g.
networks, servers, storage, applications and
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and
released with minimal management effort or
service provider interaction.
Services are considered as cloud computing
services within the meaning of this circular if
the conditions defined in points 135 and 136 are
fulfilled.
a. Community cloud cloud infrastructure available for the exclusive
use by a specific community of In-Scope
Entities, including several In-Scope Entities of a
single group.
b. Hybrid cloud cloud infrastructure that is composed of two or
more distinct cloud infrastructures.
c. Public cloud cloud infrastructure available for open use by
the general public.
d. Private cloud cloud infrastructure available for the exclusive
use by a single In-Scope Entity.
2) Competent authority the CSSF or the ECB as competent authority for
the supervision of entities in accordance with
point 2 of this circular.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
5/59
3) Core business activities the activities of the In-Scope Entities which are
subject to an authorisation or a registration by
a competent authority.
4) Critical or important any function that is considered critical or
function4 important as set out in points 18 to 20.
5) Function any processes, services or activities.
6) ICT outsourcing an arrangement of any form between the In-
Scope Entity and a service provider by which
that service provider performs an ICT process,
an ICT service or an ICT activity that would
otherwise be undertaken by the In-Scope Entity
itself. The services are pure ICT services in
nature.
7) In-Scope Entity all supervised entities in accordance with point
2 of this circular.
8) Internal control functions the risk control function, the compliance
function and the internal audit function.
9) Intragroup outsourcing5 an outsourcing by an In-Scope Entity to a
service provider who belongs to the same
group.
For In-Scope Entities that are subject to
supervision on a consolidated basis in
accordance with their sectoral laws and
regulations or that belong to a group that is
subject to such consolidated supervision it is
important to note that the scope of application
of the provisions on intragroup outsourcing
extends beyond the sole scope of such
consolidated supervision.
4 In the context of outsourcing arrangements, the meaning of ‘critical or important function’ is to be read
according to MiFID Law and Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565 supplementing MiFID II. In
that regard, outsourcing arrangements comprise those that relate to ‘critical functions’ for the purpose of
the recovery and resolution framework as defined under Article 1(64) of the BRRD Law.
5 For credit institutions that belong to a network of a central body or are part of an institutional protection
scheme (IPS) subject to the conditions laid down in Article 113(7) CRR, an outsourcing to a member of the
network or of the IPS shall be considered as an intragroup outsourcing for the purpose of this circular.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
6/59
10) Key function holders persons who have significant influence over the
direction of the In-Scope Entity but who are
neither members of the management body and
are not the Chief Executive Officer (CEO).
In line with the specific provisions of Circular
CSSF 12/552 and Circular CSSF 20/758, they
include the heads of internal control functions
and may include the Chief Financial Officer
(CFO), where they are not members of the
management body, and, where identified on a
risk-based approach by institutions, other key
function holders.
Other key function holders might include heads
of significant business lines, European
Economic Area/European Free Trade
Association branches, third country subsidiaries
and other internal functions.
11) Management body an In-Scope Entity’s body or bodies, which are
appointed in accordance with national law,
which are empowered to set the In-Scope
Entity’s strategy, objectives and overall
direction, and which oversee and monitor
management decision-making and include the
persons who effectively direct the business of
the In-Scope Entity and the directors and
persons responsible for the management of the
In-Scope Entity.
In accordance with relevant circulars CSSF as
applicable, the term management body
encompasses the notions of authorised
management, board of directors/or board of
managers and/or supervisory board and
executive board.
12) Member State Member State of the European Union. This
term includes EEA countries other than EU
countries as a matter of principal.
13) an arrangement of any form between an In-
Scope Entity and a service provider by which
a. Outsourcing
that service provider performs a process, a
service or an activity that would otherwise be
undertaken by the In-Scope Entity itself.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
7/59
b. Sub-outsourcing a situation where the service provider under
an outsourcing arrangement further transfers
an outsourced function to another service
provider (the “sub-contractor”).
There may be multiple sub-outsourcing
arrangements within a same outsourcing
arrangement. Sub-outsourcing may also be
referred to as a ‘chain of outsourcing’, or
‘chain-outsourcing’.
14) Service provider a third-party entity that is undertaking an
outsourced process, service or activity, or
parts thereof, under an outsourcing
arrangement.
In this context, a group entity shall be
considered as a third-party entity.
15) Third country a State other than a Member State of the
European Economic Area.
Abbreviations and acronyms:
16) AML/CFT Law Law of 12 November 2004 on the fight against
money laundering and terrorist financing, as
amended
17) BRRD Law Law of 18 December 2015 on the resolution,
reorganisation and winding up measures of
credit institutions and certain investment firms
and on deposit guarantee and investor
compensation schemes, as amended
18) BRRD institution a credit institution or a BRRD investment firm
according to Article 59-15, point 13 LFS
19) CRR Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013
on prudential requirements for credit
institutions and investment firms
20) DORA Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 14 December
2022 on digital operational resilience for the
financial sector and amending Regulations (EC)
No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No
600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014 and (EU)
2016/1011
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
8/59
21) EBA the European Banking Authority
22) ECB European Central Bank
23) EEA European Economic Area
24) ESMA the European Securities and Markets Authority
25) GDPR Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016
on the protection of natural persons with regard
to the processing of personal data and on the
free movement of such data, and repealing
Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection
Regulation)
26) ICT Information and Communication Technology
27) LFS Law of 5 April 1993 on the financial sector, as
amended
28) LPS Law of 10 November 2009 on payment services,
as amended
29) MiFID II Directive 2014/65/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014
on markets in financial instruments and
amending Directive 2002/92/EC and Directive
2011/61/EU
30) MiFID Law Law of 30 May 2018 on markets in financial
instruments, as amended
31) UCITS Law Law of 17 December 2010 relating to
undertakings for collective investment, as
amended
Chapter 2. Scope of application and proportionality
2. This circular defines the supervisory expectations that must be complied
with when resorting to outsourcing arrangements.
Part I of this circular applies to the following In-Scope Entities when
performing outsourcing other than ICT outsourcing6:
6 For the sake of clarity, these entities are not required to include their ICT outsourcing arrangements in the
register referred to in section 4.2.7.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
9/59
- credit institutions7 8, including their branches, within the meaning of the LFS.
- investment firms, including their branches, within the meaning of the LFS.
- payment institutions and electronic money institutions, including their
branches, (each referred to as a payment institution) within the meaning of
the LPS. Account information service providers (AISP) that only provide the
service in point 8 of Annex of the LPS are not included in the scope of application
of this circular. Any reference made in this circular to ‘payment services’ includes
payment services or issuance of electronic money provided by electronic money
institutions;
This circular applies in full (Part I and Part II) to the following In-Scope
Entities:
- specialised and support professionals of the financial sector (PFS) including
their branches, within the meaning of the LFS. Branches in Luxembourg of PFS
incorporated under foreign law shall be deemed to be included in the notion of
PFS;
- POST Luxembourg governed by the Law of 15 December 2000 on postal
financial services9. All provisions that apply to payment institutions shall also
apply to POST Luxembourg;
- branches in Luxembourg of credit institutions, investment firms and payment
institutions incorporated in a third country. They shall be deemed to be included
in the notion of credit institution, investment firm and payment institution
respectively.
This circular applies also in full to the following entities established in
Luxembourg when performing ICT outsourcing:
- management companies authorised only under Article 125-1 of Chapter 16 of
the UCITS Law
This circular must be complied with by In-Scope Entities when designing the
internal governance arrangements in the context of their business model taken
as a whole, giving in particular due consideration to those activities that are
regulated by the LFS, the LPS or any other national law conferring a competence
to the CSSF. Consequently, this circular also applies when In-Scope Entities
provide investment services and perform investment activities in accordance
with the MiFID Law, develop internal governance arrangements in the context
7 The ECB is the competent authority for the prudential supervision of significant credit institutions
(significant institutions – SIs). SIs shall refer to the relevant ECB rules (if any).
8 This circular shall apply to (mixed) financial holding companies that are approved in accordance with Article
34-2 LFS. See also Circular CSSF 12/552, point 3, Part I.
9 For the sake of clarity, the wording “postal financial services” has the meaning provided for in Article 1 of
the Law of 15 December 2000 as amended.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
10/59
of the AML/CFT Law or provide asset management services and depositary tasks
for Undertakings for Collective Investments established in Luxembourg.
Branches in Luxembourg of the aforementioned types of entities that are part
of a legal entity whose head office is located in a different Member State of the
EEA (EEA branches) are subject to the supervision of the competent authority
of that Member State (home Member State). However, as the CSSF is competent
for ensuring that EEA branches comply with the specific requirements laid down
in the thematic or sectoral frameworks10, Part I of this circular applies if EEA
branches outsource functions that belong to areas for which the CSSF retains
an oversight responsibility, except for ICT outsourcing11. While this circular
does not impose specific requirements with regard to internal governance
arrangements of EEA branches, such branches are nevertheless expected to
adopt internal governance arrangements which are comparable to those
provided for in this circular, in coordination with their head office.
3. The provisions of this circular shall apply to all In-Scope Entities on an
individual basis. Credit institutions and investment firms shall also comply with
this circular on a sub-consolidated and consolidated basis, taking into account
their prudential scope of consolidation. Credit institutions and investment firms
that are a parent undertaking shall ensure that the internal governance
arrangements, processes and mechanisms in their subsidiaries are consistent,
well integrated and appropriate for the effective application of this circular at all
relevant levels of supervision12.
4. In-Scope Entities shall, when complying with this circular, have regard to the
principle of proportionality. According to this principle, In-Scope Entities shall
take implementing measures that are proportionate to their size and their
internal organisation as well as to the nature, scale and complexity of their
activities or services, including their risks. As such, In-Scope Entities that are
large, complex or engage in risky activities or services shall adopt a more robust
framework for their central administration, internal governance and risk
management. By contrast, In-Scope Entities may apply a less elaborated
framework where justified by their size and internal organisation as well as by
the nature, scale and complexity of their activities or services, including their
risks.
10 notably in the context of investment services in accordance with the MiFID Law, the AML/CFT Law, the
provision of asset management services and depositary tasks for Undertakings for Collective Investments
established in Luxembourg.
11 Those arrangements are covered by Circular CSSF 25/882 on requirements on the use of ICT third-party
services for Financial Entities subject to DORA and DORA regulation.
12 Where a waiver has been granted pursuant to Article 10 CRR to cooperative societies or Article 7 CRR,
the provisions of this circular shall be applied at the level of the parent undertaking including its subsidiaries
or by the central body and its affiliates as a whole.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
11/59
5. That said, outsourcing arrangements may have an impact on the risk profile
of the In-Scope Entities, notably the operational risk they may be exposed to
(e.g. disruption risk). Consequently, In-Scope Entities may need to enhance
their internal control framework and procedures to integrate this modified risk
dimension into their entity-wide risk management framework.
6. To support the appropriate implementation of this circular, In-Scope Entities
shall document their proportionality analysis in writing and have their
conclusions approved by the management body.
Chapter 3. General principles governing outsourcing
arrangements and intragroup outsourcing
Sub-chapter 3.1 General principles governing outsourcing arrangements
7. Outsourcing is a means for In-Scope Entities to get relatively easy access to
expertise including in the space of new technologies and to achieve economies
of scale and therefore improve cost efficiency. However, the implementation of
outsourcing arrangements by In-Scope Entities creates specific risks and shall
be subject to specific requirements in accordance with Articles 36-2 LFS, 37-
1(5) LFS, 11(4) LPS and 24-7(4) LPS, where applicable.
Outsourcing arrangements shall be subject to the following principles:
- Outsourcing arrangements shall be subject to appropriate oversight and may,
in no circumstances, lead to the circumvention of the spirit and letter of
regulatory requirements or prudential measures.
- When outsourcing operational tasks to a service provider, the In-Scope Entity
shall ensure that those operational tasks are effectively performed. In-Scope
Entities shall perform an appropriate monitoring and auditing of outsourcing
arrangements, including through the receiving of appropriate reports in line with
section 4.3.3 and with section 4.2.6 and sub-section 4.3.2.3, respectively.
- The responsibility of the management body for the In-Scope Entity and all its
activities can never be outsourced:
• Any outsourcing that would result in the delegation by the management
body of its responsibility, altering the relationship and obligations of the
In-Scope Entities towards their clients, undermining the conditions of
their authorisation or removing or modifying any of the conditions
subject to which the In-scope Entity’s authorisation was granted, shall
not be permitted.
• The In-Scope Entity remains fully responsible for compliance with
regulatory requirements including in the case of sub-outsourcing as
sub-outsourcing can change the risk and reliability of outsourcing
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
12/59
arrangements. Therefore, the In-Scope Entity must determine whether
sub-outsourcing is authorized and adapt its internal governance and
risk management framework with regard to sub-outsourcing, in
particular regarding critical or important outsourcing arrangements,
while the initial service provider also has monitoring obligations.
- Outsourcing arrangements shall not create undue operational risks. The risks
to be considered include those associated with the relationship with the service
provider, the risk caused by allowing for sub-outsourcing, the concentration risk
posed by multiple outsourcing arrangements to the same service provider
and/or the concentration risk posed by outsourcing critical or important
functions to a limited number of service providers. In-Scope Entities shall in any
case manage concentration and dependence risks appropriately.
- Outsourcing shall not impair the quality and independence of In-Scope Entities’
internal controls or the ability of those entities to oversee and supervise
compliance with regulatory requirements and to continue their activities under
a going concern.
- Outsourcing must not lead to a situation where In-Scope Entities would be in
breach with legal or regulatory requirements on central administration and
become empty shells that lack the substance to remain authorised. To this end,
management bodies shall ensure that, including in a context of an outsourcing
of functions to a parent entity or other group entities, sufficient resources are
available to appropriately support and ensure the performance of their
responsibilities, including overseeing the risks and managing the outsourcing
arrangements.
- When outsourcing, In-Scope Entities must ensure that all requirements of this
circular are met on an ongoing basis. Functions that are considered critical under
a resolution perspective may also be outsourced subject to not creating
impediments to the resolvability of the BRRD institution.
8. When performing outsourcing arrangements that involve information subject
to confidentiality requirements, In-Scope Entities shall put in place appropriate
confidentiality arrangements and ensure compliance with Article 41(2a) LFS or
Article 30(2a) LPS, where applicable.
9. In-Scope Entities shall comply with GDPR and the requirements of the
Luxembourg competent authority in this area, namely the “Commission
Nationale pour la Protection des Données” (CNPD).
10. Outsourcing may, in no circumstances, hamper the performance of
supervisory powers by competent authorities with regard to all aspects of
supervisory relevance. Outsourcing arrangements shall in particular not impact
the competent authorities’ ability to oversee and supervise In-Scope Entities’
compliance with legal or regulatory requirements under a going concern or BRRD
institutions’ regulatory compliance from a resolution perspective.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
13/59
Sub-chapter 3.2 Intragroup outsourcing
11. Intragroup outsourcing is not necessarily less risky than outsourcing to an
entity outside the group. Intragroup outsourcing is therefore subject to the same
regulatory framework and conditions as outsourcing to service providers outside
the group. Where In-Scope Entities intend to outsource to entities within the
same group, they shall also ensure that the reason for selecting a group entity
is based on objective reasons. In particular, the group entity shall be suitable
and the outsourcing arrangement may not expose the In-Scope Entities to an
undue conflict of interest.
12. When outsourcing within the same group, In-Scope Entities may have a
higher level of control over and information about the outsourced function and
the service provider, which they could take into account in their risk assessment.
In-Scope Entities shall however not exclusively rely on their group entities
for the management of the outsourcing and shall design procedures for the
performance of appropriate monitoring and oversight at the level of the In-
Scope Entity itself to ensure compliance with the requirements set out in
this circular.
13. Subject to the general principles set out in sub-chapter 3.1, In-Scope
Entities that use centrally provided governance arrangements shall therefore
comply with the following:
a. where In-Scope Entities have outsourcing arrangements with service
providers within the group, the management body of the In-Scope Entity
retains, also for these outsourcing arrangements, full responsibility for
compliance with the regulatory requirements and the effective application
of this circular;
b. where In-Scope Entities have outsourcing arrangements with a service
provider within the group, the In-Scope Entity shall ensure that those
outsourcing arrangements, including operational tasks that are outsourced,
are effectively performed. In-Scope Entities shall perform an appropriate
monitoring and auditing of outsourcing arrangements, including through
the receiving of appropriate reports, in line with section 4.3.3. and with
section 4.2.6 and sub-section 4.3.2.3, respectively.
14. In addition to point 13 above, In-Scope Entities within a group shall take
into account the following:
a. where the operational monitoring of outsourcing is centralised (e.g. as part
of a master agreement for the monitoring of outsourcing arrangements),
In-Scope Entities shall ensure that both the independent monitoring of the
service provider and its appropriate oversight by each In-Scope Entity is
possible, including by receiving, at least annually and upon request, from
the centralised monitoring function, reports that include, at least, a
summary of the risk assessment and performance monitoring and by
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
14/59
challenging those reports. In addition, In-Scope Entities shall receive from
the centralised monitoring function a summary of the relevant outsourcing
audit reports and, upon request, the full audit report.
The management body of In-Scope Entities shall determine whether the
extent and the contents of these reports are consistent and appropriate
and shall take action if these reports do not enable it to comply with the
requirements on internal governance and on risk management as laid down
in other relevant circulars CSSF;
b. In-Scope Entities shall ensure that their management body shall be duly
informed of relevant planned changes regarding service providers that are
monitored centrally and the potential impact of these changes on the
critical or important functions provided, including a summary of the risk
analysis, comprising legal risks, compliance with regulatory requirements
and the impact on service levels, in order for them to assess the impact of
these changes and accept them or take action as appropriate;
c. where In-Scope Entities within the group rely on a central pre-outsourcing
assessment of outsourcing arrangements, each In-Scope Entity shall
receive a summary of the assessment and ensure that it takes into
consideration its specific structure and risks within the decision-making
process and accept it or take action as appropriate;
d. for In-Scope Entities within a group, the register as referred to in section
4.2.7 may be kept centrally. Where the register of all existing outsourcing
arrangements, is established and maintained centrally within a group, the
competent authorities and all In-Scope Entities shall be able to obtain the
individual register without undue delay. This register shall include all
outsourcing arrangements, including outsourcing arrangements with
service providers inside that group. In-Scope Entities shall be satisfied that
the register complies with the provisions set out in Section 4.2.7 on
Documentation requirements;
e. in relation to their exit strategies, where In-Scope Entities rely on an exit
plan for a critical or important function that has been established at group
level, all In-Scope Entities shall receive a summary of the plan and be
satisfied that the plan can be effectively executed in accordance with the
provisions set out in Section 4.3.4 on Exit plans;
f. In-Scope Entities within a group may rely on centrally established business
continuity plans regarding their outsourced functions. In-Scope Entities
shall receive a summary of the plan and be satisfied that the plan complies
with the provisions of Section 4.2.5 on Business continuity plans.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
15/59
Chapter 4. Governance of outsourcing arrangements
Sub-chapter 4.1 Assessment of outsourcing arrangements
Section 4.1.1 Outsourcing
15. In-Scope Entities shall establish whether an arrangement with a third party
falls under the definition of outsourcing. Within this assessment, consideration
shall be given to whether the function (or a part thereof) that is outsourced to
a service provider is performed on a recurrent or an ongoing basis by the service
provider and whether this function (or part thereof) would normally fall within
the scope of functions that would or could realistically be performed by In-Scope
Entities, even if the In-Scope Entity has not performed this function in the past
itself.
16. Where an arrangement with a service provider covers multiple functions, In-
Scope Entities shall consider all aspects of the arrangement within their
assessment, e.g. if the service provided includes the provision of data storage
hardware and the backup of data, both aspects shall be considered together.
17. As a general principle, In-Scope Entities shall not consider the following as
outsourcing:
a. a function that is legally required to be performed by a service provider,
e.g. statutory audit;
b. market information services (e.g. provision of data by Bloomberg, Moody’s,
Standard & Poor’s, Fitch);
c. global network infrastructures (e.g. Visa, MasterCard);
d. clearing and settlement arrangements between clearing houses, central
counterparties and settlement institutions and their members;
e. global financial messaging infrastructures that are subject to oversight by
relevant authorities;
f. correspondent banking services; and
g. the acquisition of services that would otherwise not be undertaken by the
In-Scope Entity (e.g. advice from an architect, legal advice and
representation in front of the court and administrative bodies, cleaning,
gardening and maintenance of the In-Scope Entity’s premises, medical
services, servicing of company cars, catering, vending machine services,
clerical services, travel services, post-room services, receptionists,
secretaries and switchboard operators), goods (e.g. plastic cards13, card
13 This does not cover the issuance of payment instruments such as the issuance of credit cards, which is a
regulated payment service under the LPS.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
16/59
readers, office supplies, personal computers, furniture) or utilities (e.g.
electricity, gas, water, telephone line).
Section 4.1.2 Critical or important functions
18. In-Scope Entities shall always consider a function as critical or important in
the following situations:
a. where a defect or failure in its performance would materially impair:
i. their continuing compliance with the conditions of their authorisation
and/or their other legal and regulatory obligations;
ii. their financial performance; or
iii. the soundness or continuity of their services and activities;
b. when operational tasks of internal control functions or operational tasks of
the financial and accounting function as referred in points 21 to 29 are
outsourced;
c. when credit institutions and payment institutions intend to outsource
functions of banking activities or payment services to an extent that would
require authorisation14 by the relevant competent authority as referred to
in points 61 to 63.
19. In the case of BRRD institutions, particular attention shall be given to the
assessment of the criticality or importance of functions if the outsourcing
concerns functions related to core business lines and critical functions according
to the BRRD Law15 and identified by these institutions using the criteria set out
in Articles 6 and 7 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/77816.
Functions that are necessary to perform activities of core business lines or
critical functions shall be considered as critical or important functions for the
purpose of this circular, unless the BRRD institution’s assessment establishes
that a failure to provide the outsourced function or the inappropriate provision
of the outsourced function would not have an adverse impact on the operational
continuity of the core business line or critical function.
14 See the activities listed in Annex I of LFS and in Annex of LPS related to payment services.
15 Critical functions according to Article 1(64) of BRRD Law means activities, services or operations the
discontinuance of which is likely in one or more Member States, to lead to the disruption of services that
are essential to the real economy or to disrupt financial stability due to the size, market share, external and
internal interconnectedness, complexity or cross-border activities of a BRRD institution or group, with
particular regard to the substitutability of those activities, services or operations.
16 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/778 of 2 February 2016 supplementing Directive
2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to the circumstances and conditions
under which the payment of extraordinary ex post contributions may be partially or entirely deferred, and
on the criteria for the determination of the activities, services and operations with regard to critical functions,
and for the determination of the business lines and associated services with regard to core business lines.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
17/59
20. When assessing whether an outsourcing arrangement relates to a function
that is critical or important, In-Scope Entities shall take into account, together
with the outcome of the risk assessment outlined in points 66 to 70 at least the
following factors:
a. whether the outsourcing arrangement is directly connected to core business
activities;
b. the potential impact of any disruption to the outsourced function or failure
of the service provider to provide the service at the agreed service levels on a
continuous basis on their:
i. short- and long-term financial resilience and viability, including, if
applicable, its assets, capital, costs, funding, liquidity, profits and losses;
ii. business continuity and operational resilience;
iii. operational risk, including conduct, ICT and legal risks;
iv. reputational risks;
v. where applicable, recovery and resolution planning, resolvability and
operational continuity in an early intervention, recovery or resolution
situation;
c. the potential impact of the outsourcing arrangement on their ability to:
i. identify, monitor and manage all risks;
ii. comply with legal and regulatory requirements;
iii. conduct appropriate audits regarding the outsourced function;
d. the potential impact on the services provided to its clients;
e. all outsourcing arrangements, the In-Scope Entity’s aggregated exposure to
the same service provider and the potential cumulative impact of outsourcing
arrangements in the same business area;
f. the size and complexity of any business area affected;
g. the possibility that the proposed outsourcing arrangement might be scaled
up without replacing or revising the underlying agreement;
h. the ability to transfer the proposed outsourcing arrangement to another
service provider, if necessary or desirable, both contractually and in practice,
including the estimated risks, impediments to business continuity, costs and
time frame for doing so (‘substitutability’);
i. the ability to reintegrate the outsourced function into the In-Scope Entity, if
necessary or desirable;
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
18/59
j. the protection of data and the potential impact of a confidentiality breach or
failure to ensure data availability and integrity on the In-Scope Entity and its
clients, including but not limited to compliance with GDPR.
Section 4.1.3 Outsourcing arrangements relating to internal
control functions
21. Outsourcing arrangements of internal control functions shall not effectively
result in the transfer of these functions as a whole to the service provider(s).
Therefore, outsourcing arrangements shall be limited, in principle, to operational
tasks of these functions.
22. Outsourcing arrangements of operational tasks of the internal control
functions shall not undermine the permanence of the internal control
arrangements and functions of the In-Scope Entity or their continued
effectiveness. In practice this means that outsourcing arrangements shall be
proportionate and shall not result in the effective carving out of the substance
of the In-Scope Entities’ internal control functions.
23. In accordance with the requirements of section 4.3.1.2, In-Scope Entities
shall ascertain that the service provider complies with applicable suitability
requirements and has appropriate and sufficient technical knowledge and
experience. In particular, the service provider shall demonstrate an appropriate
and up-to-date knowledge of the regulatory framework that applies to the In-
Scope Entity.
24. When outsourcing operational tasks of the internal control functions, the
service provider shall be placed under the oversight of and report to the person
in charge of the relevant internal control function of the In-scope Entity (e.g.
the Chief Compliance Officer, the Chief Risk Officer or the Chief Internal
Auditor). Where In-scope Entities outsource the full range of operational tasks
of their internal control function, the service provider shall report to the member
of the management body in charge of the internal control function.
25. In the context of the internal audit function, the service provider shall also
have a direct access to the management body in its supervisory functions or,
where appropriate, to the chairperson of the audit committee. In addition, the
service provider shall carry out the internal audit operational tasks in accordance
with the In-Scope Entity’s internal audit plan and work programme, document
the work and the findings of each mission in sufficient detail and issue a
dedicated report on each mission. All documents shall be drafted in French,
German or English and delivered to the person in charge of the internal audit
function, to the management body and, where applicable, to the audit
committee.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
19/59
Section 4.1.4 Outsourcing arrangements relating to the financial
and accounting function
26. Outsourcing arrangements of the financial and accounting function shall not
effectively result in the transfer of this function as a whole to the service
provider(s). Therefore, outsourcing arrangements shall be limited, in principle,
to operational tasks of this function. Outsourcing arrangements of operational
tasks of the financial and accounting functions shall not undermine the
permanence of the central administration of the In-Scope Entity.
27. When outsourcing operational tasks of the accounting function, In-Scope
Entities shall have, at the closing of each day, unconditional and unrestricted
access to the balance of all accounts and of all accounting movements of the
day in order to provide the competent authority or any other body, as required
by applicable laws and regulations, with this information.
28. When using an accounting system that is located outside of Luxembourg
(accounting system hosting outsourcing) independently or in connection with
the outsourcing of operational tasks of the accounting function, the In-Scope
Entity shall have, at the end of each day, a secure backup of all end of day
accounting positions, including client positions, in a readable format, to
guarantee an autonomous preparation of a balance sheet, a profit and loss
statement and client positions.
This backup shall be stored at the premises of the In-Scope Entity in the EEA,
of a group entity located in the EEA, or of another service provider (i.e. a service
provider different from the one to whom the accounting system is outsourced)
located in the EEA. The accounting system shall allow keeping regular accounts
in accordance with the applicable accounting framework in Luxembourg, the
preparation of statutory accounts and the preparation of the prudential reports
to the competent authority.
29. In case of outsourcing of the production of prudential reports, the person in
charge of the financial and accounting function in the In-Scope Entity shall
ensure that these reports represent faithfully the In-Scope Entity’s prudential
situation and are prepared in accordance with the applicable instructions. In
addition, this person shall be able to ensure that the In-Scope Entity’s annual
accounts are prepared in accordance with the applicable accounting laws and
regulations17.
17 The Law of 17 June 1992 relating to the annual and consolidated accounts of credit institutions governed
by the laws of Luxembourg for credit institutions or the Law of 19 December 2002 as amended relating to
the trade register the accounting rules and the annual accounts of companies for other In-Scope Entities.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
20/59
Sub-Chapter 4.2 Governance framework
Section 4.2.1 Sound governance arrangements and third-party
risk
30. As part of the overall internal control framework, including internal control
mechanisms,18 In-Scope Entities shall have a holistic entity-wide risk
management framework extending across all business lines and internal units.
Under that framework, In-Scope Entities shall identify and manage all their
risks, including risks caused by arrangements with third parties. The risk
management framework shall also enable In-Scope Entities to make well-
informed decisions on risk-taking and ensure that risk management measures
are appropriately implemented, including with regard to cyber risks.19
31. In-Scope Entities, taking into account the principle of proportionality, shall
identify, assess, monitor and manage all risks resulting from arrangements with
third parties to which they are or might be exposed, regardless of whether or
not those arrangements are outsourcing arrangements. The risks, in particular
the operational risks, of all arrangements with third parties, shall be assessed
in line with points 66 to 70.
32. In-Scope Entities shall ensure that they comply with all requirements under
GDPR, including for their third-party and outsourcing arrangements.
Section 4.2.2 Sound governance arrangements for outsourcing
33. The outsourcing of functions shall not result in the delegation of the
management body’s responsibilities. The management body remains fully
responsible and accountable for complying with all of their regulatory obligations
or their responsibilities to their customers, including the ability to oversee the
outsourcing of critical or important functions.
34. The management body is at all times fully responsible and accountable for
at least:
a. ensuring that the In-Scope Entity meets on an ongoing basis the conditions
with which it must comply to remain authorised, including any conditions
imposed by the competent authority;
b. the internal organisation of the In-Scope Entity;
c. the identification, assessment and management of conflicts of interest;
d. the setting of the In-Scope Entity’s strategies and policies (e.g. the business
model, the risk appetite, the risk management framework);
18 Please also refer to Articles 6, 7, 24-2 and 24-3 LPS, when applicable.
19 Please refer to Circular CSSF 20/750 on ICT and security risk management.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
21/59
e. overseeing the day-to-day management of the In-Scope Entity, including
the management of all risks associated with outsourcing; and
f. the oversight role of the management body in its supervisory function,
including overseeing and monitoring management decision-making.
35. Outsourcing shall not lower the suitability requirements applied to the In-
Scope Entity’s management body and key function holders. In-Scope Entities
shall have adequate competence, sufficient and appropriately skilled resources
to ensure an appropriate management and oversight of outsourcing
arrangements.
36. In-Scope Entities shall:
a. clearly assign the responsibilities for the documentation, management and
control of outsourcing arrangements;
b. allocate sufficient skilled resources to ensure compliance with the legal and
regulatory requirements, including this circular and the documentation and
monitoring all outsourcing arrangements;
c. for each outsourced activity, designate from among its employees a person
who will be in charge of managing the outsourcing relationship(s) and
managing access to confidential data; and
d. establish an outsourcing function or designate a sufficiently senior staff
member who is directly accountable to the management body (e.g. a key
function holder of a control function) and responsible for managing and
overseeing the risks of outsourcing arrangements as part of the In-Scope
Entity’s internal control framework and overseeing the documentation of
outsourcing arrangements. Small entities20 shall at least ensure a clear and
sound division of tasks and responsibilities for the management and control
of outsourcing arrangements and may assign the outsourcing function to a
member of the In-Scope Entity’s management body.
37. In-Scope Entities shall maintain at all times sufficient substance and not
become ‘empty shells’ or ‘letter-box entities’. To this end, they shall:
a. meet all the conditions of their authorisation at all times, including the
management body effectively carrying out its responsibilities as set out in
point 34;
b. retain a clear and transparent organisational framework and structure that
enables them to ensure compliance with legal and regulatory requirements;
20 Credit institutions and investment firms shall refer to Circulars CSSF 12/552 and CSSF 20/758 to perform
the assessment of small entities.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
22/59
c. exercise appropriate oversight and be able to manage the risks that are
generated by the outsourcing of critical or important functions, in particular
where operational tasks of internal control functions, of the financial and
accounting function or of core business activities are outsourced; and
d. have sufficient skilled resources and capacities to ensure compliance with
points a. to c. above.
38. When setting up an outsourcing arrangement, In-Scope Entities shall at least
ensure that:
a. they can take and implement decisions related to their business activities
and critical or important functions, including with regard to those that have
been outsourced;
b. they maintain the orderliness of the conduct of their business and, for credit
institutions and payment institutions, the banking and payment services
they provide;
c. the risks related to current and planned outsourcing arrangements are
adequately identified, assessed, managed and mitigated, including risks
related to ICT and financial technology (fintech);
d. appropriate confidentiality arrangements are in place regarding data and
other information;
e. an appropriate flow of relevant information with service providers is
maintained;
f. with regard to the outsourcing of critical or important functions, they are
able to undertake at least one of the following actions, within an appropriate
time frame:
i. transfer the function to alternative service providers;
ii. reintegrate the function; or
iii. discontinue the business activities that are depending on the function.
g. where personal data are processed by service providers located in the EEA
and/or third countries, appropriate measures are implemented and data
are processed in accordance with GDPR;
h. appropriate confidentiality arrangements are in place and ensure
compliance with Article 41(2a) LFS or Article 30(2a) LPS, where applicable.
Section 4.2.3 Outsourcing policy
39. The management body of an In-Scope Entity that has outsourcing
arrangements in place or plans on entering into such arrangements shall
approve, regularly review and update a written outsourcing policy and ensure
its implementation, as applicable, on an individual, sub-consolidated and
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
23/59
consolidated basis. For credit institutions and investment firms, the outsourcing
policy shall, in particular, take into account the requirements pertaining to “New
Product Approval Process”21.
40. The policy shall include the main phases of the life cycle of outsourcing
arrangements and define the principles, responsibilities and processes in
relation to outsourcing. In particular, the policy shall cover at least:
a. the responsibilities of the management body in line with points 33 and 34,
including its involvement, as appropriate, in the decision-making on
outsourcing of critical or important functions;
b. the involvement of business lines, internal control functions and other
individuals in respect of outsourcing arrangements;
c. the planning of outsourcing arrangements, including:
i. the definition of business requirements regarding outsourcing
arrangements;
ii. the criteria, including those referred to in points 18 to 20, and processes
for identifying critical or important functions;
iii. risk identification, assessment and management in accordance with
points 66 to 70;
iv. due diligence checks on prospective service providers, including the
measures required under points 71 to 75;
v. procedures for the identification, assessment, management and
mitigation of potential conflicts of interest, in accordance with points 43
to 46;
vi. business continuity planning in accordance with points 47 to 50;
vii. the approval process of new outsourcing arrangements. This process
must consider the additional time requirement due to the prior
notification to the competent authority in accordance with points 59 and
60;
d. the implementation, monitoring and management of outsourcing
arrangements, including:
i. the ongoing assessment of the service provider’s performance in line
with points 104 to 110;
21 Please refer to Part II, sub-chapter 7.3 of Circular CSSF 12/552 for credit institutions or to Part II, sub-
chapter 7.3 of Circular CSSF 20/758 for investment firms.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
24/59
ii. the procedures for being notified and responding to changes to an
outsourcing arrangement or service provider (e.g. to its financial
position, organisational or ownership structures, sub-outsourcing);
iii. the independent review and audit of compliance with legal and
regulatory requirements and policies;
iv. the renewal processes;
e. the documentation and record-keeping, taking into account the
requirements set out in points 53 to 58;
f. the exit strategies and termination processes, including a requirement for
a documented exit plan for each critical or important function to be
outsourced where such an exit is considered possible, taking into account
possible service interruptions or the unexpected termination of an
outsourcing agreement, in line with points 111 to 113.
41. The outsourcing policy shall differentiate between the following:
a. outsourcing of critical or important functions and other outsourcing
arrangements;
b. outsourcing to service providers that are authorised by a relevant
competent authority in a Member State or in a third country and those that
are not;
c. intragroup outsourcing arrangements and outsourcing to entities outside
the group; and
d. outsourcing to service providers located within a Member State and third
countries.
42. In-Scope Entities shall ensure that the outsourcing policy covers the
identification of the following potential effects of critical or important outsourcing
arrangements and that these are taken into account in the decision-making
process:
a. the In-Scope Entity’s risk profile;
b. the ability to oversee the service provider and to manage the risks;
c. the business continuity measures; and
d. the performance of their business activities.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
25/59
Section 4.2.4 Conflicts of interests22
43. In-Scope Entities shall identify, assess and manage conflicts of interests with
regard to their outsourcing arrangements.
44. Where outsourcing creates material conflicts of interest, including between
entities within the same group, In-Scope Entities need to take appropriate
measures to manage those conflicts of interest.
45. When functions are provided by a service provider that is part of a group or
that is owned by the In-Scope Entity or its group, the conditions, including
financial conditions, for the outsourced service shall be set at arm’s length.
However, within the pricing of services synergies resulting from providing the
same or similar services to several In-Scope Entities within a group may be
factored in, as long as the service provider remains viable on a stand-alone
basis; within a group this shall be irrespective of the failure of any other group
entity.
46. The In-Scope Entity shall, in particular, ensure that the service provider is
independent from the statutory auditor (réviseur d’entreprises agréé or cabinet
de révision agréé) in charge of the statutory audit of the In-Scope Entity and
from the group to which the statutory auditor belongs.
Section 4.2.5 Business continuity plans
47. Special attention shall be paid to the continuity aspects and the revocable
nature of an outsourcing arrangement. The In-Scope Entity shall be able to
continue its critical functions in case of exceptional events or crisis.
48. In-Scope Entities shall have in place, maintain and periodically test
appropriate business continuity plans with regard to outsourced critical or
important functions.
49. Business continuity plans shall take into account the possible event that the
quality of the provision of the outsourced critical or important function
deteriorates to an unacceptable level or fails. Such plans shall also take into
account the potential impact of the insolvency or other failures of service
providers and, where relevant, political risks in the service provider’s
jurisdiction.
50. Where the outsourcing arrangement comprises ICT systems and data of In-
Scope Entities, the measures for redundancy and backup of these systems and
data shall either be specified in the outsourcing agreement with the service
22 Please also refer to Circular CSSF 12/552, Part II, sub-chapter 7.2 (points 165 to 174) for credit
institutions or Circular CSSF 20/758, Part II, sub-chapter 7.2 (points 167 to 176) for investment firms.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
26/59
provider or configured by the In-Scope Entities23, in line with the business
continuity plan of the In-Scope Entities.
Section 4.2.6 Internal audit function
51. The internal audit function’s activities shall cover, following a risk-based
approach, the review of outsourced activities. The audit plan and programme
shall include, in particular, the outsourcing arrangements of critical or important
functions.
52. With regard to the outsourcing process, the internal audit function shall at
least ascertain:
a. that the In-Scope Entity’s framework for outsourcing, including the
outsourcing policy, is effectively implemented and is in line with the
applicable laws and regulations, the risk strategy and the decisions of the
management body;
b. the adequacy, quality and effectiveness of the assessment of the criticality
or importance of functions;
c. the adequacy, quality and effectiveness of the risk assessment for
outsourcing arrangements and that the risks remain in line with the In-
Scope Entity’s risk strategy;
d. the appropriate involvement of governance bodies; and
e. the appropriate monitoring and management of outsourcing arrangements.
Section 4.2.7 Documentation requirements
53. In-Scope Entities shall maintain an updated register of information on all
outsourcing arrangements at individual level and, as applicable, at sub-
consolidated and consolidated levels, as set out in point 3, and shall
appropriately document all current outsourcing arrangements, distinguishing
between the outsourcing of critical or important functions and other outsourcing
arrangements. In-Scope Entities shall maintain the documentation of ended
outsourcing arrangements within the register and the supporting documentation
for an appropriate period in accordance with Luxembourg law.
54. For the purposes of prudential supervision, the register shall include at least
the following information for all existing outsourcing arrangements:
a. a reference number for each outsourcing arrangement;
23 In case of outsourcing to a cloud computing infrastructure, the parametrisation of continuity measures
may be performed by the In-Scope Entities.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
27/59
b. the start date and, as applicable, the next contract renewal date, the end
date and/or notice periods for the service provider and for the In-Scope
Entity;
c. a brief description of the outsourced function, including the data that are
outsourced and whether or not personal data (e.g. by providing a yes or no
in a separate data field) have been transferred or if their processing is
outsourced to a service provider;
d. a category assigned by the In-Scope Entity that reflects the nature of the
function as described under point (c) (e.g. ICT, internal control functions),
which shall facilitate the identification of different types of arrangements;
e. the name of the service provider, the corporate registration number, the
legal entity identifier (where available), the registered address and other
relevant contact details, and the name of its parent company (if any);
f. the country or countries where the service is to be performed, including the
location (i.e. country or region) of the data;
g. whether or not (yes/no) the outsourced function is considered critical or
important, including a brief summary of the reasons why the outsourced
function is considered or not as critical or important;
h. in the case of outsourcing to a cloud service provider, the cloud service and
deployment models, i.e. public/private/hybrid/community, and the specific
nature of the data to be held and the locations (i.e. countries or regions)
where such data will be stored;
i. the date of the most recent assessment of the criticality or importance of
the outsourced function.
55. For the outsourcing of critical or important functions, the register shall
include the following additional information:
a. the In-Scope Entities and other firms within the scope of the prudential
consolidation, as applicable, that make use of the outsourcing;
b. whether or not the service provider or sub-contractor is part of the group
or is owned by In-Scope Entities within the group;
c. the date of the most recent risk assessment and a brief summary of the
main results;
d. the individual or decision-making body (e.g. the management body) in the
In-Scope Entity that approved the outsourcing arrangement;
e. the governing law of the outsourcing agreement;
f. the dates of the most recent and next scheduled audits, where applicable;
g. where applicable, the names of any sub-contractors to which material parts
of a critical or important function are sub-outsourced, including the country
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
28/59
where the sub-contractors are registered, where the service will be
performed and, if applicable, the location (i.e. country or region) where the
data will be stored;
h. an outcome of the assessment of the service provider’s substitutability (as
easy, difficult or impossible), the possibility of reintegrating a critical or
important function into the In-Scope Entity or the impact of discontinuing
the critical or important function;
i. identification of alternative service providers in line with point (h);
j. whether the outsourced critical or important function supports business
operations that are time-critical;
k. the estimated annual budget cost;
l. the date of the prior notification to the competent authority in accordance
with points 59 and 60, as applicable.
56. In-Scope Entities shall, upon request, make available to the competent
authority either the full register of all existing outsourcing arrangements or
sections specified thereof, such as information on all outsourcing arrangements
falling under one of the categories referred to in point 54(d) (e.g. all ICT
outsourcing arrangements).
57. In-Scope Entities shall appropriately document the assessments made under
points 66 to 103 and the results of their ongoing monitoring (e.g. performance
of the service provider, compliance with agreed service levels, other contractual
and regulatory requirements, updates to the risk assessment).
58. In-Scope Entities shall, upon request, make available to the competent
authority all information necessary to enable the competent authority to execute
its effective supervision, including a copy of the outsourcing agreement.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
29/59
Section 4.2.8 Supervisory conditions for outsourcing
59. An In-Scope Entity that intends to outsource a critical or important function24
shall notify in advance its plans to the competent authority using the instructions
and, where available, the forms on the CSSF website. Such a notification is to
be submitted at least three (3) months before the planned outsourcing comes
into effect. When resorting to a Luxembourg support PFS governed by Articles
29-1 to 29-6 LFS, this notice period is reduced to one (1) month. Any planned
outsourcing arrangement which has not been notified within the above
notification period and/or without using the instructions and, where applicable,
the forms available on the CSSF website will be considered as not notified.
60. The notification is without prejudice to the supervisory measures or the
application of binding measures and/or administrative sanctions which the
competent authority might take as part of its ongoing supervision, where it
appears that these outsourcing projects do not comply with the applicable legal
and regulatory framework.
In any event, In-Scope Entities remain fully responsible to comply with all the
relevant laws and regulations as regards the planned outsourcing projects.
61. Should credit institutions or payment institutions outsource functions of
banking activities or payment services to a service provider located in
Luxembourg or another Member State, to an extent that the performance of
that function would require authorisation or registration where such activities
would be carried out in Luxembourg, such an outsourcing shall take place only
if one of the following conditions is met:
a. the service provider is authorised or registered by a relevant competent
authority in that Member State to perform such banking activities or
payment services; or
b. the service provider is otherwise allowed to carry out those banking
activities or payment services in accordance with the relevant national legal
framework.
24 An In-Scope Entity shall also notify the competent authority in case of material changes to existing
outsourcing arrangements (e.g. in case such material changes impact a critical or important outsourced
function or lead to an outsourcing arrangement becoming critical or important) without undue delay.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
30/59
62. Should credit institutions or payment institutions outsource functions of
banking activities or payment services to a service provider located in a third
country, to an extent that the performance of that function would require
authorisation or registration where such activities would be carried out in
Luxembourg, such an outsourcing shall take place only if the following conditions
are met:
a. the service provider is authorised or registered to provide that banking
activity or payment service in the third country and is supervised by a
relevant competent authority in that third country (referred to as a
‘supervisory authority’); and
b. there is an appropriate cooperation agreement25, e.g. in the form of a
memorandum of understanding or college agreement, between the
competent authority and the supervisory authorities responsible for the
supervision of the service provider. In-Scope Entities shall contact the CSSF
in the early planning stages of their planned outsourcing arrangement to
ascertain that cooperation arrangements between the CSSF and the third
country supervisory authority are or can be put in place.
63. For the purposes of points 61 and 62, the outsourcing of functions of banking
activities to an extent that the performance of that function would require
authorisation or registration where such activities would be carried out in
Luxembourg shall apply in the event where a credit institution26 intends to
proceed to the outsourcing of a material proportion of the activity that consists
in the taking of deposits and other repayable funds from the public27.
64. The outsourcing to a service provider located in Luxembourg that relates to
services subject to an authorisation requirement in accordance with Articles 29-
1 to 29-6 LFS shall take place only if one of the following conditions is met:
a. the service provider is authorised by the CSSF in accordance with Articles
29-1 to 29-6 LFS to provide such services; or
b. the service provider is otherwise allowed to carry out those services, i.e. it
is a credit institution or it is an entity falling under the scope of Article 1-
1(2)(c) LFS that is part of the group to which the In-Scope Entity belongs
and which exclusively deals with group transactions.
25 Cooperation agreements may take the form of a Memorandum of Understanding or of a dedicated
agreement concluded between the competent authority and a third country supervisory authority in the
context of the prudential supervision of a specific In-Scope Entity. A list of MoUs that have been signed by
the CSSF is available on the CSSF website. The list of MoUs signed by the ECB is available on the ECB
website.
26 or POST Luxembourg.
27 In accordance with Article 2(3) LSF, persons or undertakings other than credit institutions are prohibited
from carrying out the business of taking deposits or other repayable funds from the public.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
31/59
Sub-chapter 4.3 Outsourcing process
Section 4.3.1 Pre-outsourcing analysis
65. Before entering into any outsourcing arrangement, In-Scope Entities shall:
a. assess if the outsourcing arrangement concerns a critical or important
function;
b. assess if the supervisory conditions for outsourcing are met;
c. identify and assess all of the relevant risks of the outsourcing arrangement;
d. undertake appropriate due diligence on the prospective service provider;
and
e. identify and assess conflicts of interest that the outsourcing may cause.
Sub-section 4.3.1.1 Risk assessment of outsourcing arrangements
66. In-Scope Entities shall assess the potential impact of outsourcing
arrangements on their operational capacity and risk, shall take into account the
assessment results when deciding if the function shall be outsourced to a service
provider and shall take appropriate steps to avoid undue additional operational
risks before entering into outsourcing arrangements.
67. The assessment shall include, where appropriate, scenarios of possible risk
events, including high-severity operational risk events, in particular when the
outsourcing arrangement relates to a critical or important function of the In-
Scope Entity. Within the scenario analysis, In-Scope Entities shall assess the
potential impact of failed or inadequate services, including the risks caused by
processes, systems, people or external events. In-Scope Entities shall document
the analysis performed and their results and shall estimate the extent to which
the outsourcing arrangement would increase or decrease their operational risk.
Small entities may use qualitative risk assessment approaches, while other In-
Scope Entities shall have a more sophisticated approach, including, where
available, the use of internal and external loss data to inform the scenario
analysis.
68. When carrying out the risk assessment prior to outsourcing and during
ongoing monitoring of the service provider’s performance, In-Scope Entities
shall, at least:
a. identify and classify the relevant functions and related data and systems as
regards their risk sensitivity and required security measures;
b. conduct a thorough risk-based analysis of the functions and related data
and systems that are being considered for outsourcing or have been
outsourced in order to address the potential risks, in particular the
operational risks, including legal, ICT, compliance and reputational risks,
and the oversight limitations related to the countries where the outsourced
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
32/59
services are or may be provided and where the data are or are likely to be
stored;
c. consider the consequences of where the service provider is located (within
or outside the EEA) in accordance with points 61 to 64 and whether the
service provider is supervised by a relevant competent authority;
d. consider the political stability and security situation of the jurisdictions in
question, including:
i. the laws in force, including laws on data protection;
ii. the law enforcement provisions in place; and
iii. the insolvency law provisions that would apply in the event of a service
provider’s failure and any constraints that would arise in respect of the
urgent recovery of the In-Scope Entity’s data in particular;
e. define and decide on an appropriate level of protection of data
confidentiality, of continuity of the activities outsourced and of the integrity
and traceability of data and systems in the context of the (intended)
outsourcing. In-Scope Entities shall also consider specific measures, where
necessary, for data in transit, data in memory and data at rest, such as the
use of encryption technologies in combination with an appropriate key
management architecture;
f. consider whether the service provider is a subsidiary or parent undertaking
of the In-Scope Entity or is included in the scope of accounting consolidation
and, if so, the extent to which the In-Scope Entity controls it or has the
ability to influence its actions.
69. Within the risk assessment, In-Scope Entities shall also take into account
the expected benefits and costs of the proposed outsourcing arrangement,
including weighing any risks that may be reduced or better managed against
any risks that may arise as a result of the proposed outsourcing arrangement,
taking into account at least:
a. concentration risks, including from:
i. outsourcing to a dominant service provider that is not easily
substitutable; and
ii. multiple outsourcing arrangements with the same service provider or
closely connected service providers;
b. the aggregated risks resulting from outsourcing several functions across
the In-Scope Entity and, in the case of groups of In-Scope Entities, the
aggregated risks on a consolidated basis;
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
33/59
c. in the case of significant In-Scope Entities28, the step-in risk, i.e. the risk
that may result from the need to provide financial support to a service
provider in distress or to take over its business operations; and
d. the measures implemented by the In-Scope Entity and by the service
provider to manage and mitigate the risks.
70. Where the outsourcing arrangement includes the possibility that the service
provider sub-outsources critical or important functions, or material parts
thereof, to other service providers, In-Scope Entities shall take into account:
a. the risks associated with sub-outsourcing, including the additional risks that
may arise if the sub-contractor is located in a third country or a different
country from the service provider;
b. the risk that long and complex chains of sub-outsourcing reduce their ability
to oversee the outsourced critical or important function and the ability of
competent authorities to effectively supervise them.
Sub-section 4.3.1.2 Due diligence
71. Before entering into an outsourcing arrangement and considering the
operational risks related to the function to be outsourced, In-Scope Entities shall
ensure in their selection and assessment process that the service provider is
suitable.
72. In-Scope Entities shall ensure that the service provider has the business
reputation, appropriate and sufficient abilities, the expertise, the capacity, the
resources (e.g. human, ICT, financial), the organisational structure and, if
applicable, the required regulatory authorisation(s) or registration(s) to perform
the function in a reliable and professional manner to meet its obligations over
the duration of the draft contract.
73. Additional factors to be considered when conducting due diligence on a
potential service provider include, but are not limited to:
a. its business model, nature, scale, complexity, financial situation, ownership
and group structure;
b. the long-term relationships with service providers that have already been
assessed and perform services for the In-Scope Entity;
c. whether the service provider is a parent undertaking or subsidiary of the
In-Scope Entity or is part of the scope of accounting consolidation of the
In-Scope Entity;
28 In particular entities that are in scope of art. 59-3 LFS.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
34/59
d. whether or not the service provider is supervised by relevant competent
authorities.
74. Where outsourcing involves the processing of personal or confidential data,
In-Scope Entities shall be satisfied that the service provider implements
appropriate technical and organisational measures to protect the data.
75. In-Scope Entities shall take appropriate steps to ensure that service
providers act in a manner consistent with their values and code of conduct. In
particular, with regard to service providers located in third countries and, if
applicable, their sub-contractors, In-Scope Entities shall be satisfied that the
service provider acts in an ethical and socially responsible manner and adheres
to international standards on human rights (e.g. the European Convention on
Human Rights), environmental protection and appropriate working conditions,
including the prohibition of child labour.
Section 4.3.2 Contractual phase
76. The rights and obligations of the In-Scope Entity and the service provider
shall be clearly allocated and set out in a written outsourcing agreement.
77. The outsourcing agreement shall set out:
a. a clear description of the outsourced function to be provided;
b. the start date and end date, where applicable, of the agreement and the
notice periods for the service provider and the In-Scope Entity;
c. the governing law of the agreement;
d. the parties’ financial obligations;
e. whether the sub-outsourcing, in particular, of a critical or important
function, or material parts thereof, is permitted and, if so, the conditions
specified in points 78 to 82 that the sub-outsourcing is subject to;
f. the location(s) (i.e. regions or countries) where the function will be
provided and/or where relevant data will be kept and processed, including
the possible storage location, and the conditions to be met, including a
requirement to notify the In-Scope Entity if the service provider proposes
to change the location(s);
g. where relevant, provisions regarding the accessibility, availability, integrity,
privacy and safety of relevant data, as specified in points 83 to 87;
h. the right of the In-Scope Entity to monitor the service provider’s
performance on an ongoing basis;
i. the agreed service levels, which shall include precise quantitative and
qualitative performance targets for the outsourced function to allow for
timely monitoring so that appropriate corrective action can be taken
without undue delay if the agreed service levels are not met;
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
35/59
j. the reporting obligations of the service provider to the In-Scope Entity,
including the communication by the service provider of any development
that may have a material impact on the service provider’s ability to
effectively carry out the function in line with the agreed service levels and
in compliance with applicable laws and regulatory requirements (including
the obligation to report any significant problem having an impact on the
outsourced functions as well as any emergency situation) and, as
appropriate, the obligations to submit reports of the internal audit function
of the service provider;
k. whether the service provider shall take mandatory insurance against
certain risks and, if applicable, the level of insurance cover requested;
l. the requirements to implement and test business contingency plans;
m. provisions that ensure that the data that are owned by the In-Scope Entity
can be accessed in the case of the insolvency, resolution or discontinuation
of business operations of the service provider;
n. the obligation of the service provider to cooperate with the competent
authorities and, where applicable, resolution authorities of the In-Scope
Entity, including other persons appointed by them;
o. for BRRD institutions, a clear reference to the national resolution
authority’s29 powers, especially to Articles 59-47 LFS, 66 and 69 of the
BRRD Law, and in particular a description of the ‘substantive obligations’ of
the contract in the sense of the Articles 59-47 LFS and 66 of the BRRD Law;
p. the unrestricted right of In-Scope Entities and competent authorities to
inspect and audit the service provider, including in case of sub-outsourcing,
with regard to, at least, the critical or important outsourced function, as
specified in points 88 to 100;
q. termination rights as specified in points 101 to 103.
Sub-section 4.3.2.1 Sub-outsourcing
78. The outsourcing agreement shall specify whether or not sub-outsourcing, in
particular of critical or important functions, or material parts thereof, is
permitted.
79. If sub-outsourcing of critical or important functions is permitted, In-Scope
Entities shall determine whether the part of the function to be sub-outsourced
is, as such, critical or important (i.e. a material part of the critical or important
function) and, if so, record it in the register.
29 means an authority as defined in point (8) of Article 1 of the BRRD Law.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
36/59
80. If sub-outsourcing of critical or important functions, or material parts
thereof, is permitted, the written outsourcing agreement shall:
a. specify any types of activities that are excluded from sub-outsourcing;
b. specify the conditions to be complied with in the case of sub-outsourcing;
c. specify that the service provider is obliged to oversee those services that it
has sub-contracted to ensure that all contractual obligations between the
service provider and the In-Scope Entity are continuously met;
d. require the service provider to obtain prior specific or general written
authorisation from the In-Scope Entity before sub-outsourcing data;30
e. include an obligation of the service provider to inform the In-Scope Entity
of any planned sub-outsourcing, or material changes thereof, in particular
where that might affect the ability of the service provider to meet its
responsibilities under the outsourcing agreement. This includes planned
significant changes of sub-contractors and to the notification period; in
particular, the notification period to be set shall allow the In-Scope Entity
at least to carry out a risk assessment of the proposed changes and to
object to changes before the planned sub-outsourcing, or material changes
thereof, come into effect;
f. ensure, where appropriate, that the In-Scope Entity has the right to object
to intended sub-outsourcing, or material changes thereof, or that explicit
approval is required;
g. ensure that the In-Scope Entity has the contractual right to terminate the
agreement in the case of undue sub-outsourcing, e.g. where the sub-
outsourcing materially increases the risks for the In-Scope Entity or where
the service provider sub-outsources without notifying the In-Scope Entity.
81. In-Scope Entities shall agree to sub-outsourcing critical or important
functions, or material parts thereof, only if the sub-contractor undertakes to:
a. comply with applicable laws, regulatory requirements and contractual
obligations; and
b. grant the In-Scope Entity and competent authority the same contractual
rights of access and audit as those granted by the service provider.
82. In-Scope Entities shall ensure that the service provider appropriately
oversees the sub-contractors, in line with the policy defined by the In-Scope
Entity. If the sub-outsourcing proposed could have material adverse effects on
the outsourcing arrangement of a critical or important function or would lead to
30 Please refer to Article 28 GDPR.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
37/59
a material increase of risk, including where the conditions in point 81 above
would not be met, the In-Scope Entity shall exercise its right to object to the
sub-outsourcing, if such a right was agreed, and/or terminate the contract.
Sub-section 4.3.2.2 Security of data and systems
83. The confidentiality and integrity of data and systems shall be controlled
throughout the outsourcing chain. In particular, access to data and systems shall
fulfil the principles of “need to know” and “least privilege”, i.e. access shall only
be granted to persons whose functions so require, for a specific purpose, and
their privileges shall be limited to the strict necessary minimum to exercise their
functions.
84. In-Scope Entities shall ensure that service providers, where relevant, comply
with appropriate ICT security standards.
85. Where relevant (e.g. in the context of cloud or other ICT outsourcing), In-
Scope Entities shall define data and system security requirements within the
outsourcing agreement and monitor compliance with these requirements on an
ongoing basis. Where, in the outsourcing agreement, security measures are
made available by the service provider to the In-Scope Entities for personalized
selection and configuration (notably for cloud outsourcing), In-Scope Entities
shall ensure that proper selection and configuration take place, in line with the
In-Scope Entity’s security policy and requirements.
86. In the case of outsourcing to cloud service providers and other outsourcing
arrangements that involve the handling or transfer of personal or confidential
data, In-Scope Entities shall adopt a risk-based approach to data storage and
data processing location(s) (i.e. country or region) which shall in particular take
into account point 101 c, d and e and information security considerations and
comply with the provisions of points 133 to 142.
87. Without prejudice to the requirements under GDPR, In-Scope Entities, when
outsourcing (in particular to third countries), shall take into account differences
in national provisions regarding the protection of data. In-Scope Entities shall
ensure that the outsourcing agreement includes the obligation that the service
provider protects confidential, personal or otherwise sensitive information and
complies with all legal requirements regarding the protection of data that apply
to the In-Scope Entity (e.g. the protection of personal data and that banking
secrecy or similar legal confidentiality duties with respect to clients’ information,
where applicable, are observed).
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
38/59
Sub-section 4.3.2.3 Access, information and audit rights
88. In-Scope Entities shall ensure within the written outsourcing agreement that
the internal audit function, the statutory auditor and the competent authority
have a guaranteed access to the information relating to the outsourced functions
using a risk-based approach in order to enable them to issue a well-founded
opinion on the adequacy of the outsourcing. This access implies that they may
also verify the relevant data kept by the service provider and, in the cases
provided for in the applicable national law, have the power to perform on-site
inspections of the service provider. The aforementioned opinion may, where
appropriate, be based on the reports of the service provider’s external auditor.
The written outsourcing agreement shall also provide that the internal control
functions have access to any documentation relating to the outsourced
functions, at any time and without difficulty, to maintain these functions’
continued ability to exercise their controls.
89. Regardless of the criticality or importance of the outsourced function, the
written outsourcing agreement shall refer to the information gathering and
investigatory powers of competent authorities under Articles 49, 53 and 59 LFS
and Articles 31, 38 and 58-5 LPS and, where applicable, resolution authorities
under Article 61(1) BRRD Law with regard to service providers located in a
Member State and shall also ensure those rights with regard to service providers
located in third countries.
90. With regard to the outsourcing of critical or important functions, In-Scope
Entities shall ensure within the written outsourcing agreement that the service
provider grants them, their statutory auditor and their competent authority,
including, where applicable, their resolution authority, and any other person
appointed by them or the competent authority or resolution authority, the
following:
a. full access to all relevant business premises (e.g. head offices and operation
centres), including the full range of relevant devices, systems, networks,
information and data used for providing the outsourced function, including
related financial information, personnel and the service provider’s external
auditors (‘access and information rights’); and
b. unrestricted rights of inspection and auditing related to the outsourcing
arrangement (‘audit rights’), including the possibility for the competent
authority to communicate any observations made in this context to the In-
Scope Entities, to enable them to monitor the outsourcing arrangement and
to ensure compliance with the applicable regulatory and contractual
requirements;
91. For the outsourcing of functions that are not critical or important, In-Scope
Entities shall ensure the access and audit rights as set out in point 90 and sub-
section 4.3.2.3, on a risk-based approach, considering the nature of the
outsourced function and the related operational and reputational risks, its
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
39/59
scalability, the potential impact on the continuous performance of its activities
and the contractual period. In-Scope Entities shall take into account that
functions may become critical or important over time.
92. In-Scope Entities shall ensure that the outsourcing agreement or any other
contractual arrangement does not impede or limit the effective exercise of the
access and audit rights by them, their statutory auditors, competent
authorities or third parties appointed by them to exercise these rights.
93. In-Scope Entities shall exercise their access and audit rights, determine
the audit frequency and areas to be audited on a risk-based approach and
adhere to relevant, commonly accepted, national and international audit
standards.
94. Without prejudice to their final responsibility regarding outsourcing
arrangements, In-Scope Entities may use:
a. pooled audits organised jointly with other clients of the same service
provider, and performed by them and these clients or by a third party
appointed by them, to use audit resources more efficiently and to decrease
the organisational burden on both the clients and the service provider;
b. third-party certifications and third-party or internal audit reports, made
available by the service provider.
95. For the outsourcing of critical or important functions, In-Scope Entities
shall assess whether third-party certifications and reports as referred to in
point 94(b) are adequate and sufficient to comply with their regulatory
obligations and shall not rely solely on these reports over time.
96. In-Scope Entities shall make use of the method referred to in point 94(b)
only if they:
a. are satisfied with the audit plan for the outsourced function;
b. ensure that the scope of the certification or audit report covers the systems
(i.e. processes, applications, infrastructure, data centres, etc.) and key
controls identified by the In-Scope Entity and the compliance with relevant
regulatory requirements;
c. thoroughly assess the content of the certifications or audit reports on an
ongoing basis and verify that the reports or certifications are not obsolete;
d. ensure that key systems and controls are covered in future versions of the
certification or audit report;
e. are satisfied with the aptitude of the certifying or auditing party (e.g. with
regard to rotation of the certifying or auditing company, qualifications,
expertise, re-performance/verification of the evidence in the underlying
audit file);
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
40/59
f. are satisfied that the certifications are issued and the audits are performed
against widely recognised relevant professional standards and include a test
of the operational effectiveness of the key controls in place;
g. have the contractual right to request the expansion of the scope of the
certifications or audit reports to other relevant systems and controls; the
number and frequency of such requests for scope modification shall be
reasonable and legitimate from a risk management perspective; and
h. retain the contractual right to perform individual audits at their discretion
with regard to the outsourcing of critical or important functions.
97. In-Scope Entities shall, where relevant, ensure that they are able to carry
out security penetration testing to assess the effectiveness of implemented
cyber and internal ICT security measures and processes.
98. Before a planned on-site visit, In-Scope Entities, auditors or third parties
acting on behalf of the In-Scope Entity or of the competent authority shall
provide reasonable notice to the service provider, unless this is not possible due
to an emergency or crisis situation or would lead to a situation where the audit
would no longer be effective.
99. When performing audits in multi-client environments, care shall be taken to
ensure that risks to another client’s environment (e.g. impact on service levels,
availability of data, confidentiality aspects) are avoided or mitigated.
100. Where the outsourcing arrangement carries a high level of technical
complexity, for instance in the case of cloud outsourcing, the In-Scope Entity
shall verify that whoever is performing the audit – whether it is its internal
auditors, the pool of auditors or external auditors acting on its behalf – has
appropriate and relevant skills and knowledge to perform relevant audits and/or
assessments effectively. The same applies to any staff of the In-Scope Entity
reviewing third-party certifications or audits carried out by service providers.
Sub-section 4.3.2.4 Termination rights
101. The outsourcing agreement shall expressly allow the possibility for the In-
Scope Entity to terminate the arrangement in accordance with applicable law,
including in the following situations:
a. where the service provider of the outsourced functions is in a breach of
applicable law, regulations or contractual provisions;
b. where impediments capable of altering the performance of the outsourced
function are identified;
c. where there are material changes affecting the outsourcing arrangement
or the service provider (e.g. sub-outsourcing or changes of sub-
contractors);
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
41/59
d. where there are weaknesses regarding the management and security of
confidential, personal or otherwise sensitive data or information; and
e. where instructions are given by the In-Scope Entity’s competent authority,
e.g. in the case that the competent authority is, caused by the outsourcing
arrangement, no longer in a position to effectively supervise the In-Scope
Entity.
102. The outsourcing agreement shall facilitate the transfer of the outsourced
function to another service provider or its re-incorporation into the In-Scope
Entity, whenever the continuity or quality of the service provision are likely to
be affected. To this end, the written outsourcing agreement shall:
a. clearly set out the obligations of the existing service provider, in the case
of a transfer of the outsourced function to another service provider or back
to the In-Scope Entity, including the treatment of data;
b. set an appropriate transition period, during which the service provider, after
the termination of the outsourcing arrangement, would continue to provide
the outsourced function to reduce the risk of disruptions;
c. include an obligation of the service provider to support the In-Scope Entity
in the orderly transfer of the function in the event of the termination of the
outsourcing agreement; and
d. without prejudice to applicable law, include a commitment for the service
provider to erase the data and systems of the In-Scope Entity within a
reasonable timeframe when the contract is terminated.
103. The outsourcing arrangement shall not include any termination clause or
service termination clause in case of bankruptcy, controlled management,
suspension of payments, compositions and arrangements with creditors aimed
at preventing bankruptcy or other similar proceedings. In particular, in the
context of BRRD institutions, clauses triggering the termination or service
termination because of resolution actions, reorganisation measures or a
winding-up procedure as required in accordance with the BRRD Law are not
allowed.
Section 4.3.3 Oversight of outsourced functions
104. In-Scope Entities shall monitor, on an ongoing basis, the performance of
the service providers with regard to all outsourcing arrangements on a risk-
based approach and with the main focus being on the outsourcing of critical or
important functions, including that the continuity of the services provided under
the arrangement and the availability, integrity and security of data and
information are ensured. Where the risk, nature or scale of an outsourced
function has materially changed, In-Scope Entities shall reassess the criticality
or importance of that function.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
42/59
105. In-Scope Entities shall apply due skill, care and diligence when planning,
implementing, monitoring and managing outsourcing arrangements.
106. In-Scope Entities shall regularly update their risk assessment in accordance
with points 66 to 70 and shall periodically report to the management body on
the risks identified in respect of the outsourcing of critical or important functions.
107. In-Scope Entities shall monitor and manage their internal concentration
risks caused by outsourcing arrangements, taking into account points 66 to 70.
108. In-Scope Entities shall ensure, on an ongoing basis, that outsourcing
arrangements, with the main focus being on outsourced critical or important
functions, meet appropriate performance and quality standards in line with their
policies by:
a. ensuring that they receive appropriate reports from service providers;
b. evaluating the performance of service providers using tools such as key
performance indicators, key control indicators, service delivery reports,
self-certification and independent reviews; and
c. reviewing all other relevant information received from the service provider,
including reports on business continuity measures and testing.
109. In-Scope Entities shall take appropriate measures if they identify
shortcomings in the provision of the outsourced function. In particular, In-Scope
Entities shall follow up on any indications that service providers may not be
carrying out the outsourced critical or important function effectively or in
compliance with applicable laws and regulatory requirements. If shortcomings
are identified, In-Scope Entities shall take appropriate corrective or remedial
actions. Such actions may include terminating the outsourcing agreement, with
immediate effect, if necessary.
110. In-Scope Entities31 shall inform the competent authority with no delay of
material changes and/or severe events regarding their outsourcing
arrangements that could have a material impact on the continuing provision of
their business activities, to allow the competent authority to assess whether
regulatory action is needed.
Section 4.3.4 Exit plans
111. In-Scope Entities shall have a documented exit plan when outsourcing
critical or important functions that is in line with their outsourcing policy, exit
strategies and business continuity plans, taking into account at least the
possibility of:
31 See also Circular CSSF 21/787.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
43/59
a. the termination of outsourcing arrangements;
b. the failure of the service provider;
c. the deterioration of the quality of the function provided and actual or
potential business disruptions caused by the inappropriate or failed
provision of the function;
d. material risks arising for the appropriate and continuous application of the
function.
112. In-Scope Entities shall ensure that they are able to exit outsourcing
arrangements without undue disruption to their business activities, without
limiting their compliance with regulatory requirements and without any
detriment to the continuity and quality of its provision of services to clients. To
achieve this, they shall:
a. develop and implement exit plans that are comprehensive, documented
and, where appropriate, sufficiently tested (e.g. by carrying out an analysis
of the potential costs, impacts, resources and timing implications of
transferring an outsourced service to an alternative provider); and
b. identify alternative solutions and develop transition plans to enable In-
Scope Entities to remove outsourced functions and data from the service
provider and transfer them to alternative providers or back to the In-Scope
Entity or to take other measures that ensure the continuous provision of
the critical or important function or business activity in a controlled and
sufficiently tested manner, taking into account the challenges that may
arise because of the location of data and taking the necessary measures to
ensure business continuity during the transition phase.
113. When developing exit plans, In-Scope Entities shall:
a. define the objectives of the exit plan;
b. perform a business impact analysis that is commensurate with the risk of
the outsourced processes, services or activities, with the aim of identifying
what human and financial resources would be required to implement the
exit plan and how much time it would take;
c. assign roles, responsibilities and sufficient resources to manage exit plans
and the transition of activities;
d. define success criteria for the transition of outsourced functions and data;
and
e. define the indicators to be used for the monitoring of the outsourcing
arrangement (as outlined under points 104 to 110) including indicators
based on unacceptable service levels that shall trigger the exit.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
44/59
Part II – Requirements in the context of ICT
outsourcing arrangements
114. The purpose of this Part is to define specific requirements applicable in the
context of ICT outsourcing (cloud and non-cloud), and that shall be complied
with in addition to the general requirements laid out in Part I of this circular.
The following provisions contribute to the sound and prudent management, the
proper organisation of the In-Scope Entities and the preservation of information
security of the In-Scope Entities32.
115. The requirements set out in the present Part II do not apply to business
process outsourcing (i.e. outsourcing arrangements that are not pure ICT
outsourcing) even if the outsourcing arrangements themselves rely on ICT
outsourcing i.e. underlying ICT systems form part of this business process
outsourcing.
116. When ICT outsourcing, or at least one of the sub-contractors in case of
sub-outsourcing, relies on a cloud computing infrastructure as defined in point
1, the In-Scope Entities shall comply with the requirements of points 114 to
119, as relevant, and Chapter 2 of Part II only. In case of ICT outsourcing
arrangements other than those relying on cloud computing infrastructure as
defined in point 1, In-Scope Entities shall comply with the requirements of points
114 to 119, as relevant, and Chapter 1 of Part II only.
117. In case of ICT sub-outsourcing, the requirements of this Part (as applicable
in line with point 116) shall apply to the whole outsourcing chain.
118. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, an In-Scope Entity may,
if evidenced by comprehensive and robust conclusions from the assessment of
the criticality of functions and the risk analysis, justify not applying the
requirements set out in the following points when the ICT outsourcing is not
critical or important and is unlikely to become critical or important:
a. point 103: continuity in case of resolution or reorganisation or another
procedure; and
b. point 112(b): transfer of services where the continuity of the provision of
services is threatened.
119. In-Scope Entities are reminded that for all ICT outsourcing arrangements,
they shall:
32 As required, inter alia, under Article 5(1a) LFS, Article 17 LFS and Article 11(2) LPS, point 135 of Circular
CSSF 18/698, Article 5(2) of CSSF Regulation N° 10-4 and Article 57(2) of Delegated Regulation (EU)
231/2013.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
45/59
a. ensure that access to data and systems fulfil the principles of “need to
know” and “least privilege”, i.e. access is only granted to persons whose
functions so require, with a specific purpose, and their privileges shall be
limited to the strict necessary minimum to exercise their functions; and
b. ensure that access to data subject to professional secrecy are granted in
compliance with Article 41(2a) LFS or Article 30(2a) LPS where applicable.
Chapter 1. ICT outsourcing arrangements other than those relying
on a cloud computing infrastructure
120. The requirements of points 59 and 60 apply to ICT outsourcing
arrangements concerned by the present chapter.
Sub-chapter 1.1 Requirements applicable to In-Scope Entities other than
Support PFS authorised under Articles 29-3, 29-5 and 29-6 LFS
and their branches abroad
121. Without prejudice to point 119 above, In-Scope Entities may outsource
their ICT system management/operation services:
a. in Luxembourg33, solely to a credit institution or a financial professional
holding a support PFS authorisation in accordance with Article 29-3 LFS (IT
systems and communication networks operators of the financial sector
“OSIRC”); the unique exception allowed under Article 1-1 (2) c) LFS is the
recourse to an entity of the group to which the In-Scope Entity belongs and
which exclusively deals with group transactions;
b. abroad, to any ICT service provider, including an entity of the group to
which the In-Scope Entity belongs.
122. In-Scope Entities may outsource ICT services other than ICT system
management/operation services to any ICT service provider, including a group
entity providing ICT services or a support PFS. Such outsourcing arrangements
must be set up in compliance with the requirements of point 119 above. In
particular, if the service provider is not allowed to access to data subject to
professional secrecy in compliance with Article 41(2a) LFS or Article 30(2a) LPS
where applicable, the service provider may have access to this data only if it is
overseen, throughout its mission, by a person of the In-Scope Entity in charge
of ICT.
33 As per the LFS, the operation of ICT systems for credit institutions, professionals of the financial sector,
payment institutions, e-money institutions, UCIs, pension funds, insurance undertakings or reinsurance
undertakings established under Luxembourg law or foreign law is a regulated activity requiring an
authorisation to be exercised in Luxembourg.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
46/59
Sub-chapter 1.2 Requirements applicable to Support PFS authorised under
Articles 29-3, 29-5 and 29-6 LFS and their branches abroad
123. For the exclusive purpose of this sub-chapter, the following definitions
apply:
a. Support PFS: an In-Scope Entity, including its branches, that is authorised
to perform OSIRC34 activities in accordance with Article 29-3 or PSDC35
activities in accordance with Articles 29-5 or 29-6 LFS;
b. Own ICT systems36 37: systems supporting the support PFS' organisation
and administration; they are not proposed as a service to third parties and
not used by the services proposed to third parties;
c. Client ICT systems: systems that fulfill the two following cumulative
conditions:
i. they partially or exclusively support the activities carried out for
regulated financial sector clients of the support PFS, irrespective of
whether they belong to the client or to the support PFS or where they
are located; and
ii. the support PFS is responsible to its client for their proper functioning.
124. Without prejudice to point 119 above, support PFS and their branches
authorised as OSIRC in accordance with Article 29-3 LFS may partially
outsource their ICT operator services, i.e. some management/operation
services of client ICT systems38 provided that the conditions of points 126 and
127 are fulfilled.
125. Without prejudice to point 119 above, support PFS and their branches
authorised as PSDC in accordance with Articles 29-5 or 29-6 LFS may partially
outsource the management/operation of the ICT systems supporting partially
or exclusively the dematerialisation or conservation services they provide to
regulated financial sector clients provided that the conditions of points 126 and
127 are fulfilled.
126. The service provider for the outsourcing arrangements referred to in
points 124 and 125 above shall be:
34 IT systems and communication networks operators of the financial sector (“OSIRC”).
35 Dematerialisation and/or conservation service providers of the financial sector (“PSDC”).
36 The term "system" here may be limited to software if the service relates solely to software.
37 For example (non-exhaustive list): accounting systems, staff and payment management of the support
PFS; management systems for clients' orders, purchase management, client relationship management but
also email servers, the internal files servers, internet website of the support PFS (not the one used for
services provided to its clients), the personnel's workstations, document storage, VoIP telephony, etc.
38 Such an outsourcing by an OSIRC is actually a sub-outsourcing from the perspective of In-Scope Entities
outsourcing to this OSIRC.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
47/59
a. in Luxembourg39, solely a credit institution or an entity that is
authorised as support PFS in accordance with Article 29-3 LFS;
b. Abroad, any ICT service provider, including an entity of the group to
which the support PFS belongs.
127. The outsourcing arrangements referred to in points 124 and 125 above
shall be considered as critical or important and are prohibited if they do not
comply with the following:
a. The service provision is complementary40 and does not carve out the
support PFS (or its branch as relevant) of its substance in line with
point 7;
b. Support PFS and their branches have obtained the prior approval of
all their concerned regulated financial sector clients;
c. If the service provider may have access to data subject to professional
secrecy according to Article 41 LFS or Article 30 LPS where applicable,
the support PFS and their branches have clearly informed and
obtained the prior consent of their regulated financial sector clients;
d. Each year, the support PFS and their branches must provide the
competent authority with their detailed oversight plan and exit plan
ensuring compliance with sections 4.3.3 and 4.3.4 of this circular;
e. Support PFS and their branches have obtained the prior approval of
the competent authority for such outsourcing using the instructions
and, where available, the forms on the CSSF website.
128. Without prejudice to points 59, 60 and 119 above, support PFS and their
branches may outsource the management/operation services of their own ICT
systems:
a. in Luxembourg, solely to a credit institution or an entity that is authorised
as support PFS in accordance with Article 29-3 LFS;
b. abroad, to any ICT service provider, including an entity of the group to
which the support PFS belongs.
129. The provision of ICT operation services on client ICT systems or on systems
supporting PSDC activities, by branches of support PFS to their registered office,
are prohibited if they do not comply with the relevant requirements listed in
point 127.
39 As per the LFS, the operation of ICT systems for credit institutions, professionals of the financial sector,
payment institutions, e-money institutions, UCIs, pension funds, insurance undertakings or reinsurance
undertakings established under Luxembourg law or foreign law is a regulated activity requiring an
authorisation to be exercised in Luxembourg.
40 An example of complementarity is the operation of a software by an OSIRC (or its branch as relevant)
and the cascading operation of the underlying infrastructure by a service provider.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
48/59
130. Support PFS and their branches acting as OSIRC may, for their services as
ICT operators, rely on infrastructures belonging to their group, subject to the
condition that the services provided by the group or their sub-contractors, if
any, are limited to those requiring a physical presence on these infrastructures.
The management of systems containing data and processing to be carried out
by the support PFS shall be excluded from such outsourcing. Infrastructure shall
mean the IT resources that are necessary to host the systems and data under
the management of the OSIRC. In this case, the support PFS shall, in particular,
ensure they have permanent control over the actions taken by the group for
their account. Where this outsourcing involves the presence on the
infrastructure of data subject to the professional secrecy according to Article 41
LFS or Article 30 LPS, where applicable, the support PFS shall obtain the
approval of the regulated financial sector clients before outsourcing.
131. Branches of support PFS may propose services relying on an infrastructure
established in the country in which they are established (“host country”) to their
regulated financial clients in the host country. This infrastructure may be
outsourced to a local service provider, subject to the condition that the services
provided by this service provider and its sub-contractors, if any, are limited to
those requiring a physical presence on these infrastructures and excluding any
management of systems containing data and processing to be carried out by the
support PFS or its branch. The branch shall apply the principles laid down in this
circular, and the registered office in Luxembourg shall keep the appropriate
oversight of the services provided by its branch. The branches shall obtain
approval for this local outsourcing from their regulated financial sector clients
concerned.
132. Support PFS may outsource any ICT services other than those covered by
points 124 to 131 above to any ICT service provider, including a group entity
providing ICT services or a support PFS. Such outsourcing arrangements must
be set up in compliance with the requirements of point 119 above. In particular,
if the service provider is not allowed to access to data subject to professional
secrecy in compliance with Article 41 LFS or Article 30 LPS where applicable, the
service provider may have access to this data only if it is overseen, throughout
its mission, by a person of the Support PFS in charge of ICT.
Chapter 2. ICT outsourcing arrangements relying on a cloud
computing infrastructure
133. This chapter provides additional specific requirements to comply with in
case of ICT outsourcing relying on a cloud computing infrastructure (hereafter
also “cloud computing solution”). The use of a private cloud without outsourcing
is thus excluded from the scope of this chapter.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
49/59
Sub-chapter 2.1 Definitions and application
Section 2.1.1 Specific terminology
134. For the purposes of this chapter and in addition to definitions provided in
point 1, the following definitions shall apply:
1) Client interface the software layer made available by the cloud
computing service provider to the In-Scope
Entity allowing the latter to manage its cloud
computing resources.
2) Cloud computing resource any computing capabilities (e.g. server,
storage, network, etc.) provided by a cloud
computing service provider.
3) Cloud computing service any firm proposing cloud services within the
provider meaning of the definition of this Chapter 2.
4) In-Scope Entity an In-Scope Entity as defined in point 2, is
consuming Cloud computing resources for the
purpose of carrying out its activities.
5) Multi-tenant a physical or logical infrastructure serving
several (In-Scope) Entities through shared
cloud computing resources and by means of a
standardised model.
6) Resource operation managing cloud computing resources made
available through the client interface. By
extension, “resource operator” shall mean the
natural or legal person that uses the client
interface to manage the cloud computing
resources.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
50/59
Section 2.1.2 Definition of “cloud computing”
135. Cloud computing is a model composed of the following five essential
characteristics41:
a. On-demand self-service: An In-Scope Entity 42 can unilaterally provide
computing capabilities, such as server time and network storage, as needed
automatically without requiring human interaction with the cloud computing
service provider.
b. Broad network access: Capabilities are available over the network and
accessed through standard mechanisms that promote use by
heterogeneous thin (e.g. browsers) or thick client (e.g. specific
applications) platforms (e.g. mobile phones, tablets, laptops and
workstations).
c. Resource pooling: The cloud computing service provider’s computing
resources are pooled to serve multiple (In-Scope) Entities using a multi-
tenant model, with different physical and virtual resources dynamically
assigned and reassigned according to In-Scope Entity demand. There is a
sense of location independence in that the In-Scope Entity generally has no
control or knowledge over the exact location of the provided resources, but
may be able to specify the location at a higher level of abstraction (e.g.
country, region or data centre). Examples of resources include storage,
processing, memory and network bandwidth.
d. Rapid elasticity: Capabilities can be elastically provisioned and released, in
some cases automatically, to scale rapidly outward and inward
commensurate with demand. To the In-Scope Entity, the capabilities
available for provisioning often appear to be unlimited and can be
appropriated in any quantity at any time.
e. Measured service: Cloud systems automatically control and optimise
resource use by leveraging a metering capability at some level of
abstraction appropriate to the type of service (e.g. storage, processing,
bandwidth and active user accounts). Resource usage can be monitored,
controlled and reported, providing transparency for both the provider and
the In-Scope Entity of the utilised service.
41 The CSSF relies on the definitions proposed by international organisations such as the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) or the European Union Agency for Network and Information Security
(ENISA).
42 For the sake of clarity, the definition considers the case where the In-Scope Entity itself is the operator
of the resources used.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
51/59
Section 2.1.3 Conditions of application of Chapter 2
136. An outsourcing is considered as “outsourcing to a cloud computing
infrastructure” within the meaning of this circular and governed by the
requirements of this Chapter 2 if the five essential characteristics defined in
point 135 and both of the following specific requirements are fulfilled:
a. Under no circumstances may staff employed by the cloud computing service
provider access data and systems that an In-Scope Entity owns on a cloud
computing infrastructure without prior and explicit agreement of the In-
Scope Entity and without monitoring mechanism available to the In-Scope
Entity to control the accesses. These accesses must remain exceptional.
Nevertheless, access may be necessary under a legal requirement or in an
extreme emergency following a critical incident affecting part of or all the
(In-Scope) Entities of the cloud computing service provider43. All accesses
of the cloud computing service provider must be restricted and subject to
preventive and detective measures in line with sound security practices and
audited at least annually.
b. The cloud service provision does not entail any manual interaction by the
cloud computing service provider as regards the day-to-day management
of the cloud computing resources used by the In-Scope Entity44 (e.g.
provisioning, configuration or release of cloud computing resources). Thus,
the resource operator alone (i.e. either the In-Scope Entity or a third party
other than the cloud computing service provider) shall manage its ICT
environment hosted on the cloud computing infrastructure. However, the
cloud computing service provider may intervene manually:
i. for global management of ICT systems supporting the cloud computing
infrastructure (e.g. maintenance of physical equipment, deployment of
new solutions non specific to the In-Scope Entity); or
ii. within the context of a specific request by the In-Scope Entity (e.g.
provisioning of a cloud computing resource that is missing in the
catalogue proposed by the cloud computing service provider or
performing insufficiently).
43 In cases of extreme emergency, the In-Scope Entity should be informed a posteriori.
44 Indeed, it is an automated system that allows provisioning resources, hence point (a) specifying that staff
may not have access by default to In-Scope Entity resources.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
52/59
Sub-chapter 2.2 Requirements to be observed with respect to outsourcing to a
cloud computing infrastructure
137. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, the In-Scope Entity
may, if evidenced by comprehensive and robust conclusions from the
assessment of the criticality and importance of functions and the risk analysis,
justify not to apply the requirements set out in the following points of this
circular when the activities outsourced to a cloud computing infrastructure are
not related to a critical or important function and are unlikely to become critical
or important:
a. point 142 c.: notification by the cloud computing service provider in case
of change of functionalities;
b. point 142 d.: notification by the resource operator in case of change of
functionalities.
138. The In-Scope Entity may outsource the “resource operation” as defined in
point 134 to a third party when this third party falls under one of the following
two circumstances:
a. The third-party is authorised as OSIRC under Article 29-3 LFS. The support
PSF shall also comply with the requirements of this chapter where the
operation of resources is carried out for an entity which is not a regulated
financial sector client.
b. The third-party is not authorised as OSIRC under Article 29-3 LFS, either
because it is located abroad, or because it is a Luxembourg-based entity of
the group to which the In-Scope Entity belongs which provides operating
services exclusively within the group as stated under the Article 1-1(2)c
LFS. In such a case, in addition to complying with the requirements set out
in this circular, the In-Scope Entity shall perform a prior thorough risk
analysis of the activities of the resource operator, notably by verifying that
the following points have been correctly addressed:
i. the roles and responsibilities defined between the resource operator and
the cloud computing service provider;
ii. the management of the isolation of multi-tenant environments;
iii. the indicators collected by the resource operator to monitor the systems
and data on the cloud computing infrastructure;
iv. the technical and organisational security measures implemented to
access the client interfaces in order to manage the cloud computing
resources, including the management of client interface access;
v. the consistency of the operations and security policies defined by the
resource operator with the configurations of the cloud computing
resources and the planned security measures;
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
53/59
vi. the competences of the operators (e.g. certifications, technical
training);
vii. the review of the audit reports of the cloud computing service provider
by the resource operator;
viii. the competent authority’s and the In-Scope Entity’s right to audit the
resource operator (in line with the requirements under points 88 to 100).
139. It shall be noted that an In-Scope Entity relying on a service provider that
cumulates the activities of cloud computing service provider and resource
operator is subject to the requirements of this Chapter 2 provided that both
activities are properly segregated (i.e. so that staff exercising the cloud
computing service provider function cannot access data and thereby continues
to fulfil the definition of cloud computing within the meaning of this chapter).
The same applies where the service provider cumulating both functions is
authorized under Article 29-3 LFS. If this segregation requirement cannot be
fulfilled, the outsourcing is not considered as an outsourcing to a cloud
computing infrastructure within the meaning of this chapter but as a traditional
ICT outsourcing; in such a case only the requirements of Chapter 1 of Part II
shall apply.
140. Cloud Officer:
a. The resource operator shall designate among its employees one person,
the “cloud officer”, who shall be responsible for the use of cloud services
and shall guarantee the competences of the staff managing cloud
computing resources (cf. point 142a). The resource operator shall assign
the function of “cloud officer” to a qualified person that masters the
challenges of outsourcing to a cloud computing infrastructure. This function
may be taken up by persons that already cumulate other functions within
the ICT department.
b. If resource operation is performed by the In-Scope Entity, the “cloud
officer” may cumulate the responsibility for the outsourcing relationship
management. If the In-Scope Entity relies on a third party for cloud
computing resource operation, the In-Scope Entity must know the name of
the “cloud officer” of the resource operator.
141. Necessity to inform the competent authority:
a. The notification requirements of points 59 and 60 also apply to cloud
computing outsourcing arrangements. In the particular case where an
entity authorised under Article 29-3 LFS acts as an intermediary and not as
a resource operator between an In-Scope Entity and a cloud computing
service provider, the In-Scope Entity shall submit a notification at least
three (3) months before the planned outsourcing is effectively implemented
for the outsourcing of critical or important functions to the cloud computing
service provider.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
54/59
b. Any entity authorised as OSIRC under Article 29-3 LFS shall request
authorisation from the competent authority before marketing in the
following cases:
i. the entity intends to act as a resource operator for its regulated financial
sector clients;
ii. the entity intends to provide a cloud computing infrastructure to its
regulated financial sector clients, acting thus as a cloud computing
service provider;
iii. the entity intends to provide a cloud computing solution to its regulated
financial sector clients by relying on one or more cloud computing
infrastructures. This entity acts then as a sub-outsourcing cloud
computing service provider.
c. Without prejudice to point 119, support PFS and their branches authorised
as OSIRC under Article 29-3 LFS may partially outsource their resource
operator services45 only under the conditions that compliance with point
126 and the requirements listed under point 127 are fulfilled. For the sake
of clarity, a prior approval by the competent authority is therefore required
as indicated in point 127 e. Point 129 also applies mutatis mutandis for the
provision of resource operator services.
142. Management of outsourcing risks:
a. In line with point 35, the resource operator shall retain the necessary
expertise to effectively monitor the outsourced services or functions on a
cloud computing infrastructure and manage the risks associated with the
outsourcing. Moreover, the resource operator shall ensure that staff in
charge of cloud computing resources management, including the “cloud
officer”, have sufficient competences to take on their functions based on
appropriate training in management and security of cloud computing
resources that are specific to the cloud computing service provider;
b. As set out in points 66 to 70, a risk assessment of outsourcing
arrangements shall be carried out by the In-Scope Entity. The risks specific
to the use of cloud computing technologies shall also be part of this
assessment and encompass, e.g.: isolation failure in multi-tenant
environments, the various legislations that are applicable (country where
data are stored and country where the cloud computing service provider is
established), interception of data-in-transit, failure of telecommunications
45 Such an outsourcing by an OSIRC is actually a sub-outsourcing from the perspective of In-Scope Entities
outsourcing to this OSIRC.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
55/59
(e.g. Internet connection), the use of the cloud as “shadow IT”46, the lack
of systems portability once they have been deployed on a cloud computing
infrastructure or the failure of continuity of cloud computing services;
c. Any change in the application functionality by the cloud computing service
provider - other than the changes relating to corrective maintenance - shall
be communicated prior to its implementation to the resource operator who
shall inform the In-Scope Entity, so that they may take the necessary
measures in case of material change or discontinuity;
d. Any change in the application functionality managed by the resource
operator - other than the changes relating to corrective maintenance - shall
be communicated to the In-Scope Entity, prior to its implementation, so
that the latter may take the necessary measures in case of material change
or discontinuity;
e. The In-Scope Entity and the resource operator shall have full awareness of
the continuity and security elements remaining under their responsibilities
when using a cloud computing solution;
f. The In-Scope Entity shall understand and the resource operator shall
control the risks linked to a cloud computing infrastructure;
g. The In-Scope Entity and the resource operator shall know at any time where
their data and systems are located globally47, be it production environments
or replications or backups.
46 “Shadow IT” is the use of ICT resources that is non-controlled by the ICT department.
47 It is important that the In-Scope Entity and the resource operator know in which country data is stored,
in a global way. For example, data is shared between country A and country B, but cannot be in country C
under any circumstances.
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
56/59
Part III – Date of application
143. This circular is applicable from 30 June 2022 to all outsourcing
arrangements entered into, reviewed or amended on or after this date.
144. In-Scope Entities shall review and amend existing outsourcing
arrangements with a view to ensuring that they are compliant with this circular.
145. In-Scope Entities shall complete the documentation of all existing
outsourcing arrangements in line with this circular following the first renewal
date of each existing outsourcing arrangement, but by no later than 31
December 2022.
Where the In-Scope Entities assess that the review and amendment of
outsourcing arrangements of critical or important functions existing prior to 30
June 2022 will not be finalised by 31 December 2022, they shall inform their
competent authority in a timely manner of that fact, including the measures
planned to complete the review or the possible exit strategy.
Claude WAMPACH Marco ZWICK Jean-Pierre FABER
Director Director Director
Françoise KAUTHEN Claude MARX
Director Director General
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
57/59
Annex – List of implemented ESA Guidelines
This circular implements:
 the revised EBA Guidelines on outsourcing arrangements
(EBA/GL/2019/02);
 the ESMA Guidelines on outsourcing to cloud service providers
(ESMA50-164-4285, the ESMA Cloud Guidelines) previously
implemented by Circular CSSF 21/777 amending Circular CSSF 17/654.
The above-mentioned guidelines are available on the websites of the EBA
(www.eba.europa.eu) and ESMA (www.esma.europa.eu).
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
58/59
Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier
283, route d’Arlon
L-2991 Luxembourg (+352) 26 25 1-1
direction@cssf.lu
www.cssf.lu
CIRCULAR CSSF 22/806
as amended by Circular CSSF 25/883
59/59