EBA/GL/2019/02
25 February 2019
Final Report on
EBA Guidelines on outsourcing arrangements
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Contents
Executive summary 4
Background 6
Guidelines on outsourcing 16
1. Compliance and reporting obligations 17
2. Subject matter, scope and definitions 18
Subject matter 18
Addressees 18
Scope of application 19
Definitions 19
3. Implementation 22
Date of application 22
Transitional provisions 22
Repeal 22
4. Guidelines on outsourcing 23
Title I – Proportionality: group application and institutional protection schemes 23
1 Proportionality 23
2 Outsourcing by groups and institutions that are members of an institutional protection
scheme 23
Title II – Assessment of outsourcing arrangements 25
3 Outsourcing 25
4 Critical or important functions 26
Title III – Governance framework 30
5 Sound governance arrangements and third-party risk 30
6 Sound governance arrangements and outsourcing 30
7 Outsourcing policy 33
8 Conflicts of interests 35
9 Business continuity plans 35
10 Internal audit function 36
11 Documentation requirements 36
Title IV – Outsourcing process 39
12 Pre-outsourcing analysis 39
12.1 Supervisory conditions for outsourcing 39
12.2 Risk assessment of outsourcing arrangements 40
12.3 Due diligence 43
13 Contractual phase 44
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
13.1 Sub-outsourcing of critical or important functions 45
13.2 Security of data and systems 46
13.3 Access, information and audit rights 47
13.4 Termination rights 50
14 Oversight of outsourced functions 50
15 Exit strategies 51
Title V – Guidelines on outsourcing addressed to competent authorities 53
5. Accompanying documents 56
5.1 Draft cost-benefit analysis/impact assessment 56
5.2 Feedback on the public consultation 68
Summary of responses to the consultation and of the EBA’s analysis 71
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Executive summary
Trust in the reliability of the financial system is crucial for its proper functioning and is a prerequisite
if it is to contribute to the economy as a whole. Effective internal governance arrangements are
fundamental if institutions individually and the financial system they form as a whole are to operate
well.
Over recent years, financial institutions have been increasingly interested in outsourcing business
activities also in order to reduce costs and improve their flexibility and efficiency. In the context of
digitalisation and the increasing importance of new financial technology (fintech) providers,
financial institutions are adapting their business models to embrace such technologies. Some have
intensified the use of fintech solutions and have launched projects to improve their cost efficiency
also in response to the intermediation margins of the traditional banking business model being put
under pressure by the low interest rate environment. Outsourcing is a way to get relatively easy
access to new technologies and to achieve economies of scale.
Directive 2013/36/EU (Capital Requirements Directive; CRD) strengthens the governance
requirements for institutions and Article 74(3) CRD gives the EBA the mandate to develop
guidelines on institutions’ governance arrangements. Outsourcing is one of the specific aspects of
institutions’ governance arrangements. Directive 2014/65/EU (Markets in Financial Instruments
Directive; MiFID II) contains explicit provisions regarding the outsourcing of functions in the field of
investment services and activities. Directive 2015/2366/EU (Revised Payment Service Directive;
PSD2) sets out requirements for the outsourcing of functions by payment institutions.
The EBA is updating the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) guidelines on
outsourcing that were issued in 2006, which applied exclusively to credit institutions; the aim is to
establish a more harmonised framework for all financial institutions that are within the scope of
the EBA’s mandate, namely credit institutions and investment firms subject to the CRD, as well as
payment and electronic money institutions. The guidelines set out specific provisions for these
financial institutions’ governance frameworks with regard to their outsourcing arrangements and
the related supervisory expectations and processes. The recommendation on outsourcing to cloud
service providers, published in December 2017, has been integrated into the guidelines.
Each financial institution’s management body remains responsible for that institution and all of its
activities, at all times; to this end, the management body should ensure that sufficient resources
are available to appropriately support and ensure the performance of those responsibilities,
including overseeing all risks and managing the outsourcing arrangements. Outsourcing must not
lead to a situation in which an institution becomes an ‘empty shell’ that lacks the substance to
remain authorised.
With regard to outsourcing to service providers located in third countries, financial institutions are
expected to take particular care that compliance with EU legislation and regulatory requirements
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
(e.g. professional secrecy, access to information and data, protection of personal data) is ensured
and that the competent authority is able to effectively supervise financial institutions, in particular
regarding critical or important functions outsourced to service providers.
The guidelines set out which arrangements with third parties are to be considered as outsourcing
and provide criteria for the identification of critical or important functions that have a strong impact
on the financial institution’s risk profile or on its internal control framework. If such critical or
important functions are outsourced, stricter requirements apply to these outsourcing
arrangements than to other outsourcing arrangements.
Competent authorities are required to effectively supervise financial institutions’ outsourcing
arrangements, including identifying and monitoring risk concentrations at individual service
providers and assessing whether or not such concentrations could pose a risk to the stability of the
financial system. To identify such risk concentrations, competent authorities should be able to rely
on comprehensive documentation on outsourcing arrangements compiled by financial institutions.
Next steps
The guidelines will enter into force on 30 September 2019. The 2006 guidelines on outsourcing and
the EBA’s recommendation on outsourcing to cloud service providers will be repealed at the same
time.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Background
1. Trust in the reliability of the financial system is crucial for its proper functioning and is a
prerequisite if it is to contribute to the economy as a whole. Effective internal governance
arrangements are fundamental if credit institutions and investment firms subject to Directive
2013/36/EU1 (CRD) (both referred to as ‘institutions’), payment institutions and electronic
money institutions (both referred to as ‘payment institutions’) and the financial system they
form part of are to operate well.
2. Over recent years, there has been an increasing tendency by institutions and payment
institutions to outsource activities also in order to reduce costs and improve flexibility and
efficiency. In the context of digitalisation and the increasing importance of information
technology (IT) and financial technologies (fintech), institutions and payment institutions are
adapting their business models, processes and systems to embrace such technologies. IT has
become one of the most commonly outsourced activities. Notwithstanding its benefits,
outsourcing IT and data services poses security issues and challenges to the governance
framework of institutions and payment institutions, in particular to internal controls as well as
to data management and data protection.
3. Some institutions and payment institutions have intensified the use of IT and fintech solutions
and have launched projects to improve their cost efficiency also in response to the
intermediation margins of the traditional banking lending model being put under pressure by
the low interest rate environment. Outsourcing is a way to get relatively easy access to new
technologies and to achieve economies of scale, e.g. by centralising functions within a group or
institutional protection scheme.
4. The importance of outsourcing functions to cloud service providers has increased rapidly in
many industries. In 2017, the EBA addressed the specificities of outsourcing to the cloud by
developing recommendations on outsourcing to cloud service providers,2 which were based on
the 2006 CEBS outsourcing guidelines. The recommendations aimed at overcoming the high
level of uncertainty regarding supervisory expectations on outsourcing to cloud service
providers and at removing the barriers that this uncertainty caused for institutions proceeding
with using cloud services. The recommendations have been integrated in the present guidelines
and will be repealed when the guidelines enter into force.
5. Outsourcing of important or critical functions, in particular when the service provider is located
outside the EU, creates specific risks both for institutions and payment institutions and for their
competent authorities and should be subject to appropriate oversight. Any outsourcing that
1 Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit
institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms, amending Directive 2002/87/EC and
repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC.
2 The recommendation is available on the EBA’s website under the following link: https://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-
and-policy/internal-governance/recommendations-on-outsourcing-to-cloud-service-providers
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
would result in the delegation by the management body of its responsibility, altering the
relationship and obligations of the institution or payment institution towards its clients,
undermining the conditions of its authorisation or removing or modifying any of the conditions
subject to which the institution’s or payment institution’s authorisation was granted, should not
be permitted. Outsourcing arrangements should not create undue operational risks or impair
the quality and independence of institutions’ and payment institutions’ internal controls or the
ability of those institutions and payment institutions and the competent authorities to oversee
and supervise compliance with regulatory requirements.
6. The responsibility of the institutions’ and payment institutions’ management body for the
institution or payment institution and all its activities can never be outsourced.
7. Outsourcing is also relevant in the context of gaining or maintaining access to the EU’s financial
market. Third-country institutions and payment institutions may wish to set up subsidiaries or
branches in the EU to get or maintain access to the EU’s financial markets and infrastructures.
In this context, third-country institutions and payment institutions may seek to minimise the
transfer of the effective performance of business activities to their subsidiaries and branches
located in the EU, e.g. by relying on the outsourcing of functions to the third-country parent
institution or other third-country group entities.
8. Outsourcing must not lead to a situation where an institution or a payment institution becomes
an ‘empty shell’ that lacks the substance to remain authorised. To this end, the management
body should ensure that sufficient resources are available to appropriately support and ensure
the performance of its responsibilities, including overseeing the risks and managing the
outsourcing arrangements.
9. Functions that are considered critical under a resolution perspective may also be outsourced.
Outsourcing arrangements should not create impediments to the resolvability of the institution.
10. Competent authorities must grant authorisation in full compliance with Union law; should set a
strict framework, in line with these guidelines, on outsourcing by institutions and payment
institutions in the EU to third-country entities; and should ensure consistent and effective
supervision. Competent authorities should also ensure that institutions and payment
institutions have policies and procedures in place to comply with the relevant framework at all
times.
11. Institutions and payment institutions should be able to effectively control and challenge the
quality and performance of outsourced functions and be able to carry out their own risk
assessment and ongoing monitoring. It is not sufficient for institutions and payment institutions
to undertake only formal assessments of whether or not outsourced functions meet regulatory
requirements.
12. The guidelines should be read in conjunction with, but without prejudice to, the EBA Guidelines
on internal governance (which already include requirements on institutions’ outsourcing
policies), the EBA Guidelines on common procedures and methodologies for the supervisory
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
review and evaluation process (SREP) and the EBA Guidelines on information and
communication technology (ICT) risk assessment under the SREP.
13. For payment institutions, these guidelines should be read in conjunction with the EBA Guidelines
on the information to be provided for the authorisation of payment institutions under Directive
2015/2366/EU3 (PSD2), the EBA Guidelines on security measures for operational and security
risks under the PSD24 and EBA Guidelines on major incident reporting under the PSD2.5
14. All requirements set out in these guidelines are subject to the principle of proportionality; they
are to be applied in a manner that is appropriate, taking into account, in particular, the
institution’s or payment institution’s size and internal organisation and the nature, scope and
complexity of its activities.
Rationale and objective of the guidelines
15. The EBA is updating the CEBS guidelines on outsourcing issued in 2006, which applied exclusively
to credit institutions, with the aim of establishing a more harmonised framework for the
outsourcing arrangements of financial institutions. The scope of application of these guidelines
covers not only credit institutions and investment firms subject to the CRD (referred to as
‘institutions’), but also payment and electronic money institutions (referred to as ‘payment
institutions’). The guidelines are not directly addressed to credit intermediaries and non-bank
creditors that are subject to Directive 2014/17/EU6 or to account information service providers
that are only registered for the provision of service 8 of Annex I to the PSD2. Outsourcing
arrangements between institutions, payment institutions and such entities are within the scope
of the guidelines when such entities act as outsourcing service providers.
16. The update of the guidelines takes into account and is consistent with the current requirements
under the CRD, Directive 2014/65/EU7 (MiFID II), Directive 2009/110/EC8 (Electronic Money
Directive; EMD), the PSD2 and Directive 2014/59/EU9 (Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive;
3 Directive 2015/2366/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on payment services in the
internal market, amending Directives 2002/65/EC, 2009/110/EC and 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, and
repealing Directive 2007/64/EC.
4 https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/payment-services-and-electronic-money/guidelines-on-security-measures-
for-operational-and-security-risks-under-the-psd2
5 https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/payment-services-and-electronic-money/guidelines-on-major-incidents-
reporting-under-psd2
6 Directive 2014/17/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 February 2014 on credit agreements for
consumers relating to residential immovable property and amending Directives 2008/48/EC and 2013/36/EU and Regulation
(EU) No 1093/2010.
7 Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments
and amending Directive 2002/92/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU (OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 349).
8 Directive 2009/110/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on the taking up, pursuit and
prudential supervision of the business of electronic money institutions amending Directives 2005/60/EC and 2006/48/EC and
repealing Directive 2000/46/EC.
9 Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing a framework for the
recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms and amending Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and
Directives 2001/24/EC, 2002/47/EC, 2004/25/EC, 2005/56/EC, 2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU, 2012/30/EU and 2013/36/EU, and
Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 648/2012, of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 173, 12.6.2014,
p. 190).
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
BRRD) and the respective delegated regulations adopted by the European Commission. In
addition, international developments in this area, such as the revised corporate governance
principles for banks and the guidelines on step-in risk published by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision (BCBS), have been taken into account.
17. Under Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/201010 (the EBA Regulation), the EBA is required to
issue guidelines and recommendations addressed to competent authorities and financial
institutions with a view to establishing consistent, efficient and effective supervisory practices
and ensuring the common, uniform and consistent application of Union law. In particular, the
conditions for outsourcing of functions of banking activities by institutions are not harmonised
to the same extent as for institutions and payment institutions subject to MiFID II and PSD2.
18. Divergent regulatory approaches carry a risk of regulatory arbitrage, which may expose the EU
to financial stability risks. Those risks are particularly acute in relation to the outsourcing of
functions by institutions and payment institutions to third countries, where supervisory
authorities may lack the necessary powers and tools to adequately and effectively supervise
service providers that provide critical or important functions to EU institutions and payment
institutions.
19. It is necessary to provide a clear definition of what is considered outsourcing. The definition
provided in the guidelines is in line with the related Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)
2017/56511 supplementing MiFID II.
20. The use of the term ‘critical or important functions’ is based on the wording of MiFID II and the
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565 supplementing MiFID II. It is used only for the
purpose of identifying ‘critical or important functions’ under outsourcing arrangements to which
a specific set of requirements apply. Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565 specifies,
under Article 30, that ‘an operational function shall be regarded as critical or important where
a defect or failure in its performance would materially impair the continuing compliance of an
investment firm with the conditions and obligations of its authorisation or its other obligations
under Directive 2014/65/EU, or its financial performance, or the soundness or the continuity of
its investment services and activities’. The same approach exists under Directive 2009/138/EC12
(Solvency II), while, in the context of outsourcing, the PSD2 uses ‘important function’ for the
purpose of identifying functions under outsourcing arrangements for which specific
requirements apply. Therefore, to embrace all existing legislation and to ensure a level playing
field for credit institutions, investment firms, payment institutions and electronic money
institutions, the wording used under MiFID II is used within the guidelines. It should be noted
10 Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing
Commission Decision 2009/78/EC (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 12).
11 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565 of 25 April 2016 supplementing Directive 2014/65/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council as regards organisational requirements and operating conditions for investment firms and
defined terms for the purposes of that Directive.
12 Directive 2009/138/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the taking-up and pursuit
of the business of Insurance and Reinsurance
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
that the definition of ‘critical or important function’ for the purpose of outsourcing used in these
guidelines is different from the definition of ‘critical functions’ under Article 2(1)(35) BRRD.
21. Article 109(2) CRD requires that parent undertakings and subsidiaries subject to this Directive
meet the governance requirements not only on a solo basis but also on a consolidated or sub-
consolidated basis, unless waivers for the application on a solo basis have been granted under
Article 21 CRD or Article 109(1) CRD in conjunction with Article 7 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
(Capital Requirements Regulation; CRR).13 It should be ensured that parent undertakings and
subsidiaries subject to the CRD implement such arrangements, processes and mechanisms in
their subsidiaries not subject to this Directive (e.g. payment institutions and electronic money
institutions, as well as firms subject to Directive 2011/61/EU14 and Directive 2009/65/EC15).
Governance arrangements, processes and mechanisms must be consistent and well integrated
and those subsidiaries not subject to the CRD must also be able to produce any data and
information relevant for the purpose of supervision.
Governance of outsourcing arrangements
22. In accordance with Article 74 CRD, institutions and payment institutions (in line with Article 11
PSD2) should have robust internal governance arrangements that include a clear organisational
structure. Outsourcing arrangements are one aspect of institutions’ and payment institutions’
organisational structure. The guidelines include requirements that aim to ensure that:
a. there is effective day-to-day management by senior management or the management
body;16
b. there is effective oversight by the management body;
c. there is a sound outsourcing policy and there are sound outsourcing processes;
d. institutions and payment institutions have an effective and efficient internal control
framework, including with regard to their outsourced functions;
e. all the risks associated with the outsourcing of critical or important functions are
identified, assessed, monitored, managed, reported and, as appropriate, mitigated;
13 Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements
for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1).
14 Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on Alternative Investment Fund
Managers and amending Directives 2003/41/EC and 2009/65/EC and Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009 and (EU) No 1095/2010
15 Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of laws, regulations
and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS)
16 Payment institutions should refer to the definition of a ‘management body’ and ‘senior management’ under the guidelines
on the security measures for operational and security risks of payment services under PSD2 published in December 2017 on
the EBA’s website: https://www.eba.europa.eu/-/eba-publishes-final-guidelines-on-security-measures-under-psd2
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
f. there are appropriate plans for the exit from outsourcing arrangements of critical or
important functions, e.g. by migrating to another service provider or by reintegrating the
critical or important outsourced functions; and
g. competent authorities remain able to effectively supervise institutions and payment
institutions, including the functions that have been outsourced.
23. Institutions and payment institutions must determine whether the function to be outsourced is
considered critical or important. The guidelines provide criteria to ensure that the assessment
of the criticality or importance of functions is more harmonised. Outsourcing of critical and
important functions can have a strong impact on the institution’s or payment institution’s risk
profile. To this end, additional requirements apply to the outsourcing of critical or important
functions, which aim to ensure the soundness of their governance arrangements and that
competent authorities can exercise effective supervision.
24. While the guidelines focus on the outsourcing of critical or important functions, institutions and
payment institutions need to consider that receiving services, including IT services, from third
parties creates risks, even when those arrangements are not considered to be outsourcing
arrangements or when the outsourcing arrangements would concern functions that are not
critical or important. To manage all risks, institutions and payment institutions should assess the
risks that result or may result from those arrangements, in particular the operational and
reputational risk.
25. The risks to be considered include those associated with the institution’s or the payment
institution’s relationship with the service provider, the risk caused by allowing for sub-
outsourcing, the concentration risk posed by multiple outsourcings to the same service provider
and/or the concentration risk posed by outsourcing critical or important functions to a limited
number of service providers. The concentration of outsourcing at a limited number of service
providers is particularly relevant for competent authorities when supervising the impact of
outsourcing on the stability of the financial market. In addition, overreliance on outsourcing of
critical or important functions is likely to impact the conditions for authorisation and to heighten
both concentration risks and the risk of creating ‘empty shells’ that would lack the substance to
remain authorised.
26. Similarly, outsourcing arrangements with long or complex operational chains and/or with a large
number of parties involved are likely to result in additional challenges both for institutions and
payment institutions and for competent authorities.
27. Each form of outsourcing has its specific risks and advantages. Without prejudice to the waivers
included in Articles 21 CRD that may be granted when the conditions under Article 10 of CRR are
met and waivers under Article 109(1) CRD that apply when the derogation under Article 7 CRR
has been granted by competent authorities, intragroup outsourcing is subject to the same
regulatory framework as outsourcing to service providers outside the group. Intragroup
outsourcing is not necessarily less risky than outsourcing to an entity outside the group. In
particular, with regard to intragroup outsourcing, institutions and payment institutions need to
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
take into account conflicts of interest that may be caused by outsourcing arrangements, e.g.
between different entities within the scope of consolidation.
28. Where institutions and payment institutions intend to outsource important or critical functions
to entities within the same group, they should ensure that the selection of a group entity is
based on objective reasons and that the conditions of the outsourcing arrangement are set at
arm’s length and explicitly deal with conflicts of interest that such an outsourcing arrangement
may entail. Institutions and payment institutions should clearly identify all relevant risks and
detail the mitigation measures and controls put in place to ensure that the outsourcing
arrangements with affiliated entities do not impair the institution’s or payment institution’s
ability to comply with the relevant regulatory framework. However, when outsourcing within
the same group, institutions and payment institutions may have a higher level of control over
the outsourced function, which they could take into account in their risk assessment.
29. The same aspects that are relevant for outsourcing within a group hold true when institutions
that are members of an institutional protection scheme outsource functions to a central service
provider.
30. Outsourcing critical or important functions to service providers located in third countries must
be subject to additional safeguards that ensure that this outsourcing does not lead to an undue
increase in risk or does not impair the ability of competent authorities to effectively supervise
institutions and payment institutions.
31. Institutions must also have robust governance arrangements in place for outsourcing
arrangements that are not considered critical or important. Therefore, the guidelines provide
some requirements that apply to all outsourcing arrangements and more generally to all
arrangements with third parties, taking into account the application of the proportionality
principle.
32. Outsourcing does not lower institutions’ and payment institutions’ obligation to comply with
regulatory requirements and internal corporate values, e.g. those set out within a code of
conduct. When selecting service providers, institutions and payment institutions should
carefully pay attention to human rights and take into account the impact of their outsourcing on
all stakeholders; this includes taking into account their social and environmental responsibilities.
Such aspects are of particular relevance when service providers are located in third countries.
33. Institutions and payment institutions need to manage the contractual relationship; this includes
evaluating and monitoring the ability of the service provider to fulfil the conditions included in
the written outsourcing agreement. Indeed, increased reliance on the service provider regarding
the outsourced functions, in particular with regard to critical or important functions, may have
an impact on institutions’ and payment institutions’ ability to manage their risks, such as
operational risks, including compliance and reputational risks.
34. Specific guidance is provided on the relationship between institutions, payment institutions and
service providers, including on their rights and obligations. The guidelines specify a set of aspects
that should be included within the written outsourcing agreement.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
35. Outsourcing arrangements also need to be considered in the context of institutions’ recovery
planning and resolution planning; the operational continuity of critical functions must be
ensured even when in financial distress or during financial restructuring or resolution. A business
decision to outsource a function should not in any way impede the resolvability of the
institution.
36. The institutions’, payment institutions’ and competent authorities’, including resolution
authorities, right to inspections and access to information, accounts and premises should be
ensured within the written outsourcing agreement. The right to audit is key to providing the
appropriate assurance that at least critical or important outsourced functions, as well as
functions that may become critical or important in the future, are provided as contractually
agreed and in line with regulatory requirements. However, audit and access rights for
competent authorities need to be ensured for all outsourcing arrangements to ensure that
institutions can be effectively supervised. Further guidance is provided on how institutions and
payment institutions can exercise their audit rights in a risk-based manner, taking into account
concerns regarding the organisational burden for both the outsourcing institution or payment
institution and the service provider, as well as practical, security and confidentiality concerns
regarding physical access to certain types of business premises and access to data in multi-
tenant environments.
IT outsourcing, including fintech and outsourcing to cloud service providers
37. Institutions and payment institutions must ensure that personal data are adequately protected
and kept confidential. Institutions and payment institutions fall within the scope of application
of Regulation (EU) 2016/67917 (General Data Protection Regulation; GDPR) and must comply
with it. When outsourcing IT or data services, it is imperative that business continuity and data
protection are appropriately considered. Such considerations are not limited to the outsourcing
of IT but apply in general. Institutions and payment institutions must ensure that they meet
internationally accepted information security standards and this also applies to outsourced IT
infrastructures and services.
38. Institutions and payment institutions need to have business continuity and contingency
arrangements in place to ensure that their material business activities can be performed on a
continuous basis. Therefore, such arrangements are also required from some service providers,
in particular regarding outsourced functions that are critical or important.18
39. The EBA identified differences in national regulatory and supervisory frameworks for cloud
outsourcing, e.g. with regard to the information requirements that institutions needed to
comply with, and, therefore, in 2017, issued recommendations for outsourcing to cloud service
providers. The recommendations were designed to feed into these revised guidelines to ensure
that institutions have one single framework for all their outsourcing arrangements. Indeed,
several aspects of the recommendations apply in general and are relevant beyond outsourcing
17 Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive
95/46/EC.
18 The term ‘critical or important’ is used in line with MiFID II and PSD2 and replaces the term ‘material’ that was used in the
previous guidelines.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
to cloud service providers, and those general aspects are reflected in these guidelines. However,
where appropriate and relevant, a few specific requirements are applicable exclusively to cloud
outsourcing.
40. The performance and quality of the cloud service provider’s service delivery and the level of
operational risk that it may cause to the outsourcing institution or payment institution are
largely determined by the ability of the cloud service provider to appropriately protect the
confidentiality, integrity and availability of data (in transit or at rest) and of the systems and
processes that are used to process, transfer or store those data. Appropriate traceability
mechanisms aimed at keeping records of technical and business operations are also key to
detecting malicious attempts to breach the security of data and systems. Security expectations
should take into account the need, on a risk-based approach, to protect the data and systems.
41. Cloud service providers often operate a geographically dispersed computing infrastructure that
entails the regional and/or global distribution of data storage and processing; therefore, the
security and privacy of data and their processing requires particular attention. Notwithstanding
the requirements included in these guidelines, Union and national laws apply in this respect and,
in particular with respect to any obligations or contractual rights referred to in these guidelines,
attention should be paid to data protection rules and professional secrecy requirements.
42. With regard to sub-outsourcing, cloud outsourcing is more dynamic in nature than traditional
outsourcing. There is a need for greater certainty about the conditions under which sub-
contracting can take place, in particular in the case of cloud outsourcing.
43. The guidelines specify that sub-outsourcing requires ex ante notification to institutions and
payment institutions in the case of outsourcing of critical or important functions. Institutions
and payment institutions should always have the right to terminate the contract if planned
changes to services, including such changes caused by sub-outsourcing, would have an adverse
effect on the risk assessment of the outsourced services.
Supervision and concentration risks
44. It is of particular importance that competent authorities have a comprehensive overview of the
outsourcing arrangements of institutions and payment institutions, as this enables them to
exercise their supervisory powers. Institutions and payment institutions should therefore
document all their outsourcing arrangements. In addition, institutions and payment institutions
should inform competent authorities or engage with competent authorities in a dialogue
regarding planned outsourcing arrangements, in particular with regard to critical or important
functions. The final responsibility for outsourcing always remains with the institution or payment
institution. To this end, the guidelines set out specific documentation requirements for
institutions’ and payment institutions’ outsourcing arrangements.
45. Competent authorities need to identify the concentrations of outsourcing arrangements at
service providers. The concentrations of outsourcing arrangements at service providers and as
regards critical or important functions in particular may, if the provision of the service fails, lead
to disruption of the provision of financial services by multiple institutions. If service providers,
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
e.g. in the area of IT or fintech, fail or are no longer able to provide their services, including in
the case of severe business disruption caused by external events, this may cause systemic risks
to the financial market.
46. The need to monitor and manage concentration risk is particularly relevant for certain forms of
IT outsourcing, including cloud outsourcing, which is dominated by a small number of highly
dominant service providers. For instance, compared with more traditional forms of outsourcing
offering tailor-made solutions to clients, cloud outsourcing services are much more
standardised, which allows the services to be provided to a larger number of different clients in
a much more automated manner and on a larger scale. Although cloud services can offer a
number of advantages, such as economies of scale, flexibility, operational efficiencies and cost-
effectiveness, they also raise challenges in terms of data protection and location, security issues
and concentration risk, not only from the point of view of individual institutions but also at
industry level, as large suppliers of IT and cloud services can become a single point of failure
when many institutions rely on them. Likewise, the development and increased use of financial
technology providers requires specific attention.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
EBA/GL/2019/02
25 February 2019
Guidelines on outsourcing
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
1. Compliance and reporting
obligations
Status of these guidelines
1. This document contains guidelines issued pursuant to Article 16 of Regulation (EU)
No 1093/2010.19 In accordance with Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent
authorities and financial institutions must make every effort to comply with the guidelines.
2. Guidelines set out the EBA’s view of appropriate supervisory practices within the European
System of Financial Supervision or of how Union law should be applied in a particular area.
Competent authorities as defined in Article 4(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 to which
guidelines apply should comply by incorporating them into their practices as appropriate (e.g.
by amending their legal framework or their supervisory processes), including where guidelines
are directed primarily at institutions and payment institutions.
Reporting requirements
3. In accordance with Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent authorities must
notify the EBA that they comply or intend to comply with these guidelines, or otherwise give
reasons for non-compliance, by 25/04/20219. In the absence of any notification by this
deadline, competent authorities will be considered by the EBA to be non-compliant.
Notifications should be sent by submitting the form available on the EBA website to
compliance@eba.europa.eu with the reference ‘EBA/GL/2019/02’. Notifications should be
submitted by persons with appropriate authority to report compliance on behalf of their
competent authorities. Any change in the status of compliance must also be reported to the
EBA.
4. Notifications will be published on the EBA website, in line with Article 16(3).
19 Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing
Commission Decision 2009/78/EC (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 12).
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
2. Subject matter, scope and definitions
Subject matter
5. These guidelines specify the internal governance arrangements, including sound risk
management, that institutions, payment institutions and electronic money institutions should
implement when they outsource functions, in particular with regard to the outsourcing of
critical or important functions.
6. The guidelines specify how the arrangements referred to in the previous paragraph should be
reviewed and monitored by competent authorities, in the context of Article 97 of Directive
2013/36/EU20, supervisory review and evaluation process (SREP), Article 9(3) of Directive (EU)
2015/236621, Article 5 (5) of Directive 2009/110/EC22 by fulfilling their duty to monitor the
continuous compliance of entities to which these guidelines are addressed with the conditions
of their authorisation.
Addressees
7. These guidelines are addressed to competent authorities as defined in point 40 of Article 4(1)
of Regulation (EU) No 575/201323, including the European Central Bank with regards to matters
relating to the tasks conferred on it by Regulation (EU) No 1024/201324, to institutions as
defined in point 3 of Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, to payment institutions as
defined in Article 4(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366 and to electronic money institutions within
the meaning of Article 2(1) of Directive 2009/110/EC. Account information service providers
that only provide the service in point 8 of Annex I of Directive (EU) 2015/2366 are not included
in the scope of application of these guidelines, in accordance with Article 33 of that Directive.
8. For the purpose of these guidelines, any reference to ‘payment institutions’ includes ‘electronic
money institutions’ and any reference to ‘payment services’ includes ‘issuing of electronic
money’.
20 Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit
institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms, amending Directive 2002/87/EC
and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC.
21 Directive 2015/2366/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on payment services in
the internal market, amending Directives 2002/65/EC, 2009/110/EC and 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010,
and repealing Directive 2007/64/EC.
22 Directive 2009/110/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on the taking up, pursuit
and prudential supervision of the business of electronic money institutions amending Directives 2005/60/EC and
2006/48/EC and repealing Directive 2000/46/EC.
23 Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential
requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176,
27.6.2013, p. 1).
24 Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European Central Bank
concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Scope of application
9. Without prejudice to Directive 2014/65/EU25 and Commissions Delegated Regulation (EU)
2017/56526 (which contains requirements regarding outsourcing by institutions providing
investment services and performing investment activities, as well as relevant guidance issued
by the European Securities and Markets Authority regarding investment services and activities),
institutions as defined in point 3 of Article 3 (1) of Directive 2013/36/EU should comply with
these guidelines on a solo basis, sub-consolidated basis and consolidated basis. The application
on a solo basis might be waived by competent authorities under Article 21 of Directive
2013/36/EU or Article 109(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU in conjunction with Article 7 of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. Institutions subject to Directive 2013/36/EU should comply with
this Directive and these guidelines on a consolidated and sub-consolidated basis as set out in
Article 21 and Articles 108 to 110 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
10. Without prejudice to Article 8 (3) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366 and Article 5 (7) of Directive
2009/110/EC, payment institutions and electronic money institutions should comply with these
guidelines on an individual basis.
11. Competent authorities responsible for the supervision of institutions, payment institutions and
electronic money institutions should comply with these guidelines.
Definitions
12. Unless otherwise specified, terms used and defined in Directive 2013/36/EU, Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013, Directive 2009/110/EC, Directive (EU) 2015/2366 and the EBA Guidelines on
internal governance27 have the same meaning in these guidelines. In addition, for the purposes
of these guidelines, the following definitions apply:
means an arrangement of any form between an
Outsourcing institution, a payment institution or an
electronic money institution and a service
provider by which that service provider performs
a process, a service or an activity that would
otherwise be undertaken by the institution, the
payment institution or the electronic money
institution itself.
25 Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial
instruments and amending Directive 2002/92/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU (OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 349).
26 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565 of 25 April 2016 supplementing Directive 2014/65/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council as regards organisational requirements and operating conditions for investment
firms and defined terms for the purposes of that Directive (OJ L 87, 31.3.2017, p. 1).
27 https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/internal-governance/guidelines-on-internal-governance-revised-
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Function means any processes, services or activities.
means any function that is considered critical or
Critical or important function28 important as set out in Section 4 of these
guidelines.
means a situation where the service provider
Sub-outsourcing under an outsourcing arrangement further
transfers an outsourced function to another
service provider.29
means a third-party entity that is undertaking an
Service provider outsourced process, service or activity, or parts
thereof, under an outsourcing arrangement.
Cloud services means services provided using cloud computing,
that is, a model for enabling ubiquitous,
convenient, on-demand network access to a
shared pool of configurable computing
resources (e.g. networks, servers, storage,
applications and services) that can be rapidly
provisioned and released with minimal
management effort or service provider
interaction.
Public cloud means cloud infrastructure available for open
use by the general public.
Private cloud means cloud infrastructure available for the
exclusive use by a single institution or payment
institution.
Community cloud means cloud infrastructure available for the
exclusive use by a specific community of
institutions or payment institutions, including
several institutions of a single group.
Hybrid cloud means cloud infrastructure that is composed of
two or more distinct cloud infrastructures.
Management body means an institution’s or payment institution’s
body or bodies, which are appointed in
accordance with national law, which are
empowered to set the institution’s or payment
institution’s strategy, objectives and overall
direction, and which oversee and monitor
management decision-making and include the
persons who effectively direct the business of
the institution or payment institution and the
directors and persons responsible for the
management of the payment institution.
28 The wording ‘critical or important function’ is based on the wording used under Directive 2014/65/EU (MiFID II) and
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565 supplementing MiFID II and is used only for the purpose of outsourcing;
it is not related to the definition of ‘critical functions’ for the purpose of the recovery and resolution framework as defined
under Article 2(1)(35) of Directive 2014/59/EU (BRRD).
29 For the assessment, the provisions in Section 3 apply; sub-outsourcing has also been referred to in other EBA
documents as a ‘chain of outsourcing’ or ‘chain-outsourcing’.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
3. Implementation
Date of application
13. With the exception of paragraph 63 (b), these guidelines apply from 30 September 2019 to all
outsourcing arrangements entered into, reviewed or amended on or after this date.
Paragraph 63 (b) applies from 31 December 2021.
14. Institutions and payment institutions should review and amend accordingly existing
outsourcing arrangements with a view to ensuring that these are compliant with these
guidelines.
15. Where the review of outsourcing arrangements of critical or important functions is not finalised
by 31 December 2021, institutions and payment institutions should inform their competent
authority of that fact, including the measures planned to complete the review or the possible
exit strategy.
Transitional provisions
16. Institutions and payment institutions should complete the documentation of all existing
outsourcing arrangements, other than for outsourcing arrangements to cloud service
providers, in line with these guidelines following the first renewal date of each existing
outsourcing arrangement, but by no later than 31 December 2021.
Repeal
17. The Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) guidelines on outsourcing of
14 December 2006 and the EBA recommendations on outsourcing to cloud service providers30
are repealed with effect from 30 September 2019.
30 Recommendations on outsourcing to cloud service providers (EBA/REC/2017/03).
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
4. Guidelines on outsourcing
Title I – Proportionality: group application and
institutional protection schemes
1 Proportionality
18. Institutions, payment institutions and competent authorities should, when complying or
supervising compliance with these guidelines, have regard to the principle of proportionality.
The proportionality principle aims to ensure that governance arrangements, including those
related to outsourcing, are consistent with the individual risk profile, the nature and business
model of the institution or payment institution, and the scale and complexity of their activities
so that the objectives of the regulatory requirements are effectively achieved.
19. When applying the requirements set out in these guidelines, institutions and payment
institutions should take into account the complexity of the outsourced functions, the risks
arising from the outsourcing arrangement, the criticality or importance of the outsourced
function and the potential impact of the outsourcing on the continuity of their activities.
20. When applying the principle of proportionality, institutions, payment institutions31 and
competent authorities should take into account the criteria specified in Title I of the EBA
Guidelines on internal governance in line with Article 74(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU.
2 Outsourcing by groups and institutions that are members of an
institutional protection scheme
21. In accordance with Article 109 (2) of Directive2013/36/EU, these guidelines should also apply
on a sub-consolidated and consolidated basis, taking into account the prudential scope of
consolidation.32 For this purpose, the EU parent undertakings or the parent undertaking in a
Member State should ensure that internal governance arrangements, processes and
mechanisms in their subsidiaries, including payment institutions, are consistent, well integrated
and adequate for the effective application of these guidelines at all relevant levels.
31 Payment institutions should also refer to the EBA guidelines under PSD2 on the information to be provided for the
authorisation of payment institutions and electronic money institutions and the registration of account information
service providers, which are available on the EBA’s website under the following link:
https://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/payment-services-and-electronic-money/guidelines-on-security-
measures-for-operational-and-security-risks-under-the-psd2
32 Please refer to Article 4(1) points (47) and (48) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 regarding the scope of consolidation.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
22. Institutions and payment institutions, in accordance with paragraph 21, and institutions that,
as members of an institutional protection scheme, use centrally provided governance
arrangements should comply with the following:
a. where those institutions or payment institutions have outsourcing arrangements with
service providers within the group or the institutional protection scheme33, the
management body of those institutions or payment institutions retains, also for these
outsourcing arrangements, full responsibility for compliance with all regulatory
requirements and the effective application of these guidelines;
b. where those institutions or payment institutions outsource the operational tasks of
internal control functions to a service provider within the group or the institutional
protection scheme, for the monitoring and auditing of outsourcing arrangements,
institutions should ensure that, also for these outsourcing arrangements, those
operational tasks are effectively performed, including through the receiving of
appropriate reports.
23. In addition to paragraph 22, institutions and payment institutions within a group for which no
waivers have been granted on the basis of Article 109 of Directive 2013/36/EU and Article 7 of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, institutions that are a central body or that are permanently
affiliated to a central body for which no waivers have been granted on the basis of Article 21 of
Directive 2013/36/EU, or institutions that are members of an institutional protection scheme
should take into account the following:
a. where the operational monitoring of outsourcing is centralised (e.g. as part of a master
agreement for the monitoring of outsourcing arrangements), institutions and payment
institutions should ensure that, at least for outsourced critical or important functions,
both independent monitoring of the service provider and appropriate oversight by
each institution or payment institution is possible, including by receiving, at least
annually and upon request from the centralised monitoring function, reports that
include, at least, a summary of the risk assessment and performance monitoring. In
addition, institutions and payment institutions should receive from the centralised
monitoring function a summary of the relevant audit reports for critical or important
outsourcing and, upon request, the full audit report;
b. institutions and payment institutions should ensure that their management body will
be duly informed of relevant planned changes regarding service providers that are
monitored centrally and the potential impact of these changes on the critical or
important functions provided, including a summary of the risk analysis, including legal
risks, compliance with regulatory requirements and the impact on service levels, in
order for them to assess the impact of these changes;
33 In accordance with Article 113(7) CRR, institutional protection scheme means a contractual or statutory liability
arrangement which protects those institutions that are a member of the scheme and in particular ensures their liquidity
and solvency to avoid bankruptcy where necessary.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
c. where those institutions and payment institutions within the group, institutions
affiliated to a central body or institutions that are part of an institutional protection
scheme rely on a central pre-outsourcing assessment of outsourcing arrangements, as
referred to in Section 12, each institution and payment institution should receive a
summary of the assessment and ensure that it takes into consideration its specific
structure and risks within the decision-making process;
d. where the register of all existing outsourcing arrangements, as referred to in
Section 11, is established and maintained centrally within a group or institutional
protection scheme, competent authorities, all institutions and payment institutions
should be able to obtain their individual register without undue delay. This register
should include all outsourcing arrangements, including outsourcing arrangements with
service providers inside that group or institutional protection scheme;
e. where those institutions and payment institutions rely on an exit plan for a critical or
important function that has been established at group level, within the institutional
protection scheme or by the central body, all institutions and payment institutions
should receive a summary of the plan and be satisfied that the plan can be effectively
executed.
24. Where waivers have been granted pursuant to Article 21 of Directive 2013/36/EU or
Article 109(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU in conjunction with Article 7 of Regulation (EU) No
575/2013, the provisions of these guidelines should be applied by the parent undertaking in a
Member State for itself and its subsidiaries or by the central body and its affiliates as a whole.
25. Institutions and payment institutions that are subsidiaries of an EU parent undertaking or of a
parent undertaking in a Member State to which no waivers have been granted on the basis of
Article 21 of Directive 2013/36/EU or Article 109(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU in conjunction with
Article 7 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 should ensure that they comply with these Guidelines
on an individual basis.
Title II – Assessment of outsourcing arrangements
3 Outsourcing
26. Institutions and payment institutions should establish whether an arrangement with a third
party falls under the definition of outsourcing. Within this assessment, consideration should be
given to whether the function (or a part thereof) that is outsourced to a service provider is
performed on a recurrent or an ongoing basis by the service provider and whether this function
(or part thereof) would normally fall within the scope of functions that would or could
realistically be performed by institutions or payment institutions, even if the institution or
payment institution has not performed this function in the past itself.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
27. Where an arrangement with a service provider covers multiple functions, institutions and
payment institutions should consider all aspects of the arrangement within their assessment,
e.g. if the service provided includes the provision of data storage hardware and the backup of
data, both aspects should be considered together.
28. As a general principle, institutions and payment institutions should not consider the following
as outsourcing:
a. a function that is legally required to be performed by a service provider, e.g. statutory
audit;
b. market information services (e.g. provision of data by Bloomberg, Moody’s, Standard
& Poor’s, Fitch);
c. global network infrastructures (e.g. Visa, MasterCard);
d. clearing and settlement arrangements between clearing houses, central counterparties
and settlement institutions and their members;
e. global financial messaging infrastructures that are subject to oversight by relevant
authorities;
f. correspondent banking services; and
g. the acquisition of services that would otherwise not be undertaken by the institution
or payment institution (e.g. advice from an architect, providing legal opinion and
representation in front of the court and administrative bodies, cleaning, gardening and
maintenance of the institution’s or payment institution’s premises, medical services,
servicing of company cars, catering, vending machine services, clerical services, travel
services, post-room services, receptionists, secretaries and switchboard operators),
goods (e.g. plastic cards, card readers, office supplies, personal computers, furniture)
or utilities (e.g. electricity, gas, water, telephone line).
4 Critical or important functions
29. Institutions and payment institutions should always consider a function as critical or important
in the following situations:34
a. where a defect or failure in its performance would materially impair:
i. their continuing compliance with the conditions of their authorisation or its
other obligations under Directive 2013/36/EU, Regulation (EU) No 575/2013,
34 See also Article 30 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565 of 25 April 2016 supplementing Directive
2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards organisational requirements and operating
conditions for investment firms and defined terms for the purposes of that Directive.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Directive 2014/65/EU, Directive (EU) 2015/2366 and Directive 2009/110/EC and
their regulatory obligations;
ii. their financial performance; or
iii. the soundness or continuity of their banking and payment services and
activities;
b. when operational tasks of internal control functions are outsourced, unless the
assessment establishes that a failure to provide the outsourced function or the
inappropriate provision of the outsourced function would not have an adverse impact
on the effectiveness of the internal control function;
c. when they intend to outsource functions of banking activities or payment services to
an extent that would require authorisation35 by a competent authority, as referred to
in Section 12.1.
30. In the case of institutions, particular attention should be given to the assessment of the
criticality or importance of functions if the outsourcing concerns functions related to core
business lines and critical functions as defined in Article 2(1)(35) and 2(1)(36) of Directive
2014/59/EU36 and identified by institutions using the criteria set out in Articles 6 and 7 of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/778.37 Functions that are necessary to perform
activities of core business lines or critical functions should be considered as critical or important
functions for the purpose of these guidelines, unless the institution’s assessment establishes
that a failure to provide the outsourced function or the inappropriate provision of the
outsourced function would not have an adverse impact on the operational continuity of the
core business line or critical function.
31. When assessing whether an outsourcing arrangement relates to a function that is critical or
important, institutions and payment institutions should take into account, together with the
outcome of the risk assessment outlined in Section 12.2, at least the following factors:
a. whether the outsourcing arrangement is directly connected to the provision of banking
activities or payment services38 for which they are authorised;
35 See the activities listed in Annex I of Directive 2013/36/EU.
36 Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing a framework for the
recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms and amending Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and
Directives 2001/24/EC, 2002/47/EC, 2004/25/EC, 2005/56/EC, 2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU, 2012/30/EU and 2013/36/EU,
and Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 648/2012, of the European Parliament and of the Council (BRRD) (OJ
L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 190).
37 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/778 of 2 February 2016 supplementing Directive 2014/59/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council with regard to the circumstances and conditions under which the payment of
extraordinary ex post contributions may be partially or entirely deferred, and on the criteria for the determination of the
activities, services and operations with regard to critical functions, and for the determination of the business lines and
associated services with regard to core business lines (OJ L 131, 20.5.2016, p. 41).
38 See the activities listed in Annex I of Directive 2013/36/EU.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
b. the potential impact of any disruption to the outsourced function or failure of the
service provider to provide the service at the agreed service levels on a continuous
basis on their:
i. short- and long-term financial resilience and viability, including, if applicable, its
assets, capital, costs, funding, liquidity, profits and losses;
ii. business continuity and operational resilience;
iii. operational risk, including conduct, information and communication technology
(ICT) and legal risks;
iv. reputational risks;
v. where applicable, recovery and resolution planning, resolvability and
operational continuity in an early intervention, recovery or resolution situation;
c. the potential impact of the outsourcing arrangement on their ability to:
i. identify, monitor and manage all risks;
ii. comply with all legal and regulatory requirements;
iii. conduct appropriate audits regarding the outsourced function;
d. the potential impact on the services provided to its clients;
e. all outsourcing arrangements, the institution’s or payment institution’s aggregated
exposure to the same service provider and the potential cumulative impact of
outsourcing arrangements in the same business area;
f. the size and complexity of any business area affected;
g. the possibility that the proposed outsourcing arrangement might be scaled up without
replacing or revising the underlying agreement;
h. the ability to transfer the proposed outsourcing arrangement to another service
provider, if necessary or desirable, both contractually and in practice, including the
estimated risks, impediments to business continuity, costs and time frame for doing so
(‘substitutability’);
i. the ability to reintegrate the outsourced function into the institution or payment
institution, if necessary or desirable;
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
j. the protection of data and the potential impact of a confidentiality breach or failure to
ensure data availability and integrity on the institution or payment institution and its
clients, including but not limited to compliance with Regulation (EU) 2016/67939 .
39 Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive
95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Title III – Governance framework
5 Sound governance arrangements and third-party risk
32. As part of the overall internal control framework,40 including internal control mechanisms,41
institutions and payment institutions should have a holistic institution-wide risk management
framework extending across all business lines and internal units. Under that framework,
institutions and payment institutions should identify and manage all their risks, including risks
caused by arrangements with third parties. The risk management framework should also
enable institutions and payment institutions to make well-informed decisions on risk-taking
and ensure that risk management measures are appropriately implemented, including with
regard to cyber risks.42
33. Institutions and payment institutions, taking into account the principle of proportionality in line
with Section 1, should identify, assess, monitor and manage all risks resulting from
arrangements with third parties to which they are or might be exposed, regardless of whether
or not those arrangements are outsourcing arrangements. The risks, in particular the
operational risks, of all arrangements with third parties, including the ones referred to in
paragraphs 26 and 28, should be assessed in line with Section 12.2.
34. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure that they comply with all requirements
under Regulation (EU) 2016/679, including for their third-party and outsourcing arrangements.
6 Sound governance arrangements and outsourcing
35. The outsourcing of functions cannot result in the delegation of the management body’s
responsibilities. Institutions and payment institutions remain fully responsible and accountable
for complying with all of their regulatory obligations, including the ability to oversee the
outsourcing of critical or important functions.
36. The management body is at all times fully responsible and accountable for at least:
a. ensuring that the institution or payment institution meets on an ongoing basis the
conditions with which it must comply to remain authorised, including any conditions
imposed by the competent authority;
b. the internal organisation of the institution or the payment institution;
40 Institutions should refer to Title V of the EBA guidelines on internal governance.
41 Please also refer to Article 11 of Directive 2015/2366 (PSD2).
42 See also EBA guidelines on ICT and security risk management (https://eba.europa.eu/-/eba-consults-on-guidelines-on-
ict-and-security-risk-management) and G7 fundamental elements for third-party cyber risk management in the financial
sector (https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/g7-fundamental-elements-cybersecurity-financial-sector_en).
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
c. the identification, assessment and management of conflicts of interest;
d. the setting of the institution’s or payment institution’s strategies and policies (e.g. the
business model, the risk appetite, the risk management framework);
e. overseeing the day-to-day management of the institution or payment institution,
including the management of all risks associated with outsourcing; and
f. the oversight role of the management body in its supervisory function, including
overseeing and monitoring management decision-making.
37. Outsourcing should not lower the suitability requirements applied to the members of an
institution’s management body, directors and persons responsible for the management of the
payment institution and key function holders. Institutions and payment institutions should
have adequate competence and sufficient and appropriately skilled resources to ensure
appropriate management and oversight of outsourcing arrangements.
38. Institutions and payment institutions should:
a. clearly assign the responsibilities for the documentation, management and control of
outsourcing arrangements;
b. allocate sufficient resources to ensure compliance with all legal and regulatory
requirements, including these guidelines and the documentation and monitoring of all
outsourcing arrangements;
c. taking into account Section 1 of these guidelines, establish an outsourcing function or
designate a senior staff member who is directly accountable to the management body
(e.g. a key function holder of a control function) and responsible for managing and
overseeing the risks of outsourcing arrangements as part of the institutions internal
control framework and overseeing the documentation of outsourcing arrangements.
Small and less complex institutions or payment institutions should at least ensure a
clear division of tasks and responsibilities for the management and control of
outsourcing arrangements and may assign the outsourcing function to a member of
the institution’s or payment institution’s management body.
39. Institutions and payment institutions should maintain at all times sufficient substance and not
become ‘empty shells’ or ‘letter-box entities’. To this end, they should:
a. meet all the conditions of their authorisation43 at all times, including the management
body effectively carrying out its responsibilities as set out in paragraph 36 of these
guidelines;
43 See also the regulatory technical standards (RTS) under Article 8(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU on the information to be
provided for the authorisation of credit institutions, and the implementing technical standards (ITS) under Article 8(3)
Directive 2013/36/EU on standard forms, templates and procedures for the provision of the information required for the
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
b. retain a clear and transparent organisational framework and structure that enables
them to ensure compliance with legal and regulatory requirements;
c. where operational tasks of internal control functions are outsourced (e.g. in the case
of intragroup outsourcing or outsourcing within institutional protection schemes),
exercise appropriate oversight and be able to manage the risks that are generated by
the outsourcing of critical or important functions; and
d. have sufficient resources and capacities to ensure compliance with points (a) to (c).
40. When outsourcing, institutions and payment institutions should at least ensure that:
a. they can take and implement decisions related to their business activities and critical
or important functions, including with regard to those that have been outsourced;
b. they maintain the orderliness of the conduct of their business and the banking and
payment services they provide;
c. the risks related to current and planned outsourcing arrangements are adequately
identified, assessed, managed and mitigated, including risks related to ICT and financial
technology (fintech);
d. appropriate confidentiality arrangements are in place regarding data and other
information;
e. an appropriate flow of relevant information with service providers is maintained;
f. with regard to the outsourcing of critical or important functions, they are able to
undertake at least one of the following actions, within an appropriate time frame:
i. transfer the function to alternative service providers;
ii. reintegrate the function; or
iii. discontinue the business activities that are depending on the function.
g. where personal data are processed by service providers located in the EU and/or third
countries, appropriate measures are implemented and data are processed in
accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679.
authorisation of credit institutions (https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/other-topics/rts-and-its-on-the-
authorisation-of-credit-institutions).
For payment institutions, please refer to the EBA guidelines under Directive (EU) 2015/2366 (PSD2) on the information
to be provided for the authorisation of payment institutions and electronic money institutions and for the registration of
account information service providers
(https://eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1904583/Final+Guidelines+on+Authorisations+of+Payment+Institutions+%2
8EBA-GL-2017-09%29.pdf).
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
7 Outsourcing policy
41. The management body of an institution or payment institution44 that has outsourcing
arrangements in place or plans on entering into such arrangements should approve, regularly
review and update a written outsourcing policy and ensure its implementation, as applicable,
on an individual, sub-consolidated and consolidated basis. For institutions, the outsourcing
policy should be in accordance with Section 8 of the EBA’s Guidelines on internal governance
and, in particular, should take into account the requirements set out in Section 18 (new
products and significant changes) of those guidelines. Payment institutions may also align their
policies with Sections 8 and 18 of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance.
42. The policy should include the main phases of the life cycle of outsourcing arrangements and
define the principles, responsibilities and processes in relation to outsourcing. In particular, the
policy should cover at least:
a. the responsibilities of the management body in line with paragraph 36, including its
involvement, as appropriate, in the decision-making on outsourcing of critical or
important functions;
b. the involvement of business lines, internal control functions and other individuals in
respect of outsourcing arrangements;
c. the planning of outsourcing arrangements, including:
i. the definition of business requirements regarding outsourcing arrangements;
ii. the criteria, including those referred to in Section 4, and processes for
identifying critical or important functions;
iii. risk identification, assessment and management in accordance with
Section 12.2;
iv. due diligence checks on prospective service providers, including the measures
required under Section 12.3;
v. procedures for the identification, assessment, management and mitigation of
potential conflicts of interest, in accordance with Section 8;
vi. business continuity planning in accordance with Section 9;
vii. the approval process of new outsourcing arrangements;
44 See also the EBA guidelines on the security measures for operational and security risks of payment services under PSD2,
available under: https://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/payment-services-and-electronic-
money/guidelines-on-security-measures-for-operational-and-security-risks-under-the-psd2
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
d. the implementation, monitoring and management of outsourcing arrangements,
including:
i. the ongoing assessment of the service provider’s performance in line with
Section 14;
ii. the procedures for being notified and responding to changes to an outsourcing
arrangement or service provider (e.g. to its financial position, organisational or
ownership structures, sub-outsourcing);
iii. the independent review and audit of compliance with legal and regulatory
requirements and policies;
iv. the renewal processes;
e. the documentation and record-keeping, taking into account the requirements in
Section 11;
f. the exit strategies and termination processes, including a requirement for a
documented exit plan for each critical or important function to be outsourced where
such an exit is considered possible taking into account possible service interruptions or
the unexpected termination of an outsourcing agreement.
43. The outsourcing policy should differentiate between the following:
a. outsourcing of critical or important functions and other outsourcing arrangements;
b. outsourcing to service providers that are authorised by a competent authority and
those that are not;
c. intragroup outsourcing arrangements, outsourcing arrangements within the same
institutional protection scheme (including entities fully owned individually or
collectively by institutions within the institutional protection scheme) and outsourcing
to entities outside the group; and
d. outsourcing to service providers located within a Member State and third countries.
44. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure that the policy covers the identification of
the following potential effects of critical or important outsourcing arrangements and that these
are taken into account in the decision-making process:
a. the institution’s risk profile;
b. the ability to oversee the service provider and to manage the risks;
c. the business continuity measures; and
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
d. the performance of their business activities.
8 Conflicts of interests
45. Institutions, in line with Title IV, Section 11, of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance,45 and
payment institutions should identify, assess and manage conflicts of interests with regard to
their outsourcing arrangements.
46. Where outsourcing creates material conflicts of interest, including between entities within the
same group or institutional protection scheme, institutions and payment institutions need to
take appropriate measures to manage those conflicts of interest.
47. When functions are provided by a service provider that is part of a group or a member of an
institutional protection scheme or that is owned by the institution, payment institution, group
or institutions that are members of an institutional protection scheme, the conditions, including
financial conditions, for the outsourced service should be set at arm’s length. However, within
the pricing of services synergies resulting from providing the same or similar services to several
institutions within a group or an institutional protection scheme may be factored in, as long as
the service provider remains viable on a stand-alone basis; within a group this should be
irrespective of the failure of any other group entity.
9 Business continuity plans
48. Institutions, in line with the requirements under Article 85(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU and
Title VI of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance,46 and payment institutions should have
in place, maintain and periodically test appropriate business continuity plans with regard to
outsourced critical or important functions. Institutions and payment institutions within a group
or institutional protection scheme may rely on centrally established business continuity plans
regarding their outsourced functions.
49. Business continuity plans should take into account the possible event that the quality of the
provision of the outsourced critical or important function deteriorates to an unacceptable level
or fails. Such plans should also take into account the potential impact of the insolvency or other
failures of service providers and, where relevant, political risks in the service provider’s
jurisdiction.
45 Payment institutions may also align their policies with those guidelines.
46 Available under: https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/internal-governance/guidelines-on-internal-
governance-revised-
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
10 Internal audit function
50. The internal audit function’s47 activities should cover, following a risk-based approach, the
independent review of outsourced activities. The audit plan48 and programme should include,
in particular, the outsourcing arrangements of critical or important functions.
51. With regard to the outsourcing process, the internal audit function should at least ascertain:
a. that the institution’s or payment institution’s framework for outsourcing, including the
outsourcing policy, is correctly and effectively implemented and is in line with the
applicable laws and regulation, the risk strategy and the decisions of the management
body;
b. the adequacy, quality and effectiveness of the assessment of the criticality or
importance of functions;
c. the adequacy, quality and effectiveness of the risk assessment for outsourcing
arrangements and that the risks remain in line with the institution’s risk strategy;
d. the appropriate involvement of governance bodies; and
e. the appropriate monitoring and management of outsourcing arrangements.
11 Documentation requirements
52. As part of their risk management framework, institutions and payment institutions should
maintain an updated register of information on all outsourcing arrangements at the institution
and, where applicable, at sub-consolidated and consolidated levels, as set out in Section 2, and
should appropriately document all current outsourcing arrangements, distinguishing between
the outsourcing of critical or important functions and other outsourcing arrangements. Taking
into account national law, institutions should maintain the documentation of ended
outsourcing arrangements within the register and the supporting documentation for an
appropriate period.
53. Taking into account Title I of these guidelines, and under the conditions set out in
paragraph 23(d), for institutions and payment institutions within a group, institutions
permanently affiliated to a central body or institutions that are members of the same
institutional protection scheme, the register may be kept centrally.
47 Regarding the responsibilities of the internal audit function, institutions should refer to Section 22 of the EBA Guidelines
on internal governance (https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/internal-governance/guidelines-on-internal-
governance-revised-) and payment institutions should refer to Guideline 5 of the EBA guidelines on the authorisation of
payment institutions
(https://eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1904583/Final+Guidelines+on+Authorisations+of+Payment+Institutions+%2
8EBA-GL-2017-09%29.pdf).
48See also EBA Guidelines on the supervisory review and evaluation process: https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-
policy/supervisory-review-and-evaluation-srep-and-pillar-2/guidelines-for-common-procedures-and-methodologies-
for-the-supervisory-review-and-evaluation-process-srep-and-supervisory-stress-testing
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
54. The register should include at least the following information for all existing outsourcing
arrangements:
a. a reference number for each outsourcing arrangement;
b. the start date and, as applicable, the next contract renewal date, the end date and/or
notice periods for the service provider and for the institution or payment institution;
c. a brief description of the outsourced function, including the data that are outsourced
and whether or not personal data (e.g. by providing a yes or no in a separate data field)
have been transferred or if their processing is outsourced to a service provider;
d. a category assigned by the institution or payment institution that reflects the nature of
the function as described under point (c) (e.g. information technology (IT), control
function), which should facilitate the identification of different types of arrangements;
e. the name of the service provider, the corporate registration number, the legal entity
identifier (where available), the registered address and other relevant contact details,
and the name of its parent company (if any);
f. the country or countries where the service is to be performed, including the location
(i.e. country or region) of the data;
g. whether or not (yes/no) the outsourced function is considered critical or important,
including, where applicable, a brief summary of the reasons why the outsourced
function is considered critical or important;
h. in the case of outsourcing to a cloud service provider, the cloud service and deployment
models, i.e. public/private/hybrid/community, and the specific nature of the data to be
held and the locations (i.e. countries or regions) where such data will be stored;
i. the date of the most recent assessment of the criticality or importance of the
outsourced function.
55. For the outsourcing of critical or important functions, the register should include at least the
following additional information:
a. the institutions, payment institutions and other firms within the scope of the prudential
consolidation or institutional protection scheme, where applicable, that make use of
the outsourcing;
b. whether or not the service provider or sub-service provider is part of the group or a
member of the institutional protection scheme or is owned by institutions or payment
institutions within the group or is owned by members of an institutional protection
scheme;
c. the date of the most recent risk assessment and a brief summary of the main results;
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
d. the individual or decision-making body (e.g. the management body) in the institution
or the payment institution that approved the outsourcing arrangement;
e. the governing law of the outsourcing agreement;
f. the dates of the most recent and next scheduled audits, where applicable;
g. where applicable, the names of any sub-contractors to which material parts of a critical
or important function are sub-outsourced, including the country where the sub-
contractors are registered, where the service will be performed and, if applicable, the
location (i.e. country or region) where the data will be stored;
h. an outcome of the assessment of the service provider’s substitutability (as easy,
difficult or impossible), the possibility of reintegrating a critical or important function
into the institution or the payment institution or the impact of discontinuing the critical
or important function;
i. identification of alternative service providers in line with point (h);
j. whether the outsourced critical or important function supports business operations
that are time-critical;
k. the estimated annual budget cost.
56. Institutions and payment institutions should, upon request, make available to the competent
authority either the full register of all existing outsourcing arrangements49 or sections specified
thereof, such as information on all outsourcing arrangements falling under one of the
categories referred to in point (d) of paragraph 54 of these guidelines (e.g. all IT outsourcing
arrangements). Institutions and payment institutions should provide this information in a
processable electronic form (e.g. a commonly used database format, comma separated values).
57. Institutions and payment institutions should, upon request, make available to the competent
authority all information necessary to enable the competent authority to execute the effective
supervision of the institution or the payment institution, including, where required, a copy of
the outsourcing agreement.
58. Institutions, without prejudice to Article 19(6) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366, and payment
institutions should adequately inform competent authorities in a timely manner or engage in a
supervisory dialogue with the competent authorities about the planned outsourcing of critical
or important functions and/or where an outsourced function has become critical or important
and provide at least the information specified in paragraph 54.
49 Please also refer to the EBA Guidelines on supervisory review and evaluation process, available under:
https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/supervisory-review-and-evaluation-srep-and-pillar-2
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
59. Institutions and payment institutions50 should inform competent authorities in a timely manner
of material changes and/or severe events regarding their outsourcing arrangements that could
have a material impact on the continuing provision of the institutions’ or payment institutions’
business activities.
60. Institutions and payment institutions should appropriately document the assessments made
under Title IV and the results of their ongoing monitoring (e.g. performance of the service
provider, compliance with agreed service levels, other contractual and regulatory
requirements, updates to the risk assessment).
Title IV – Outsourcing process
12 Pre-outsourcing analysis
61. Before entering into any outsourcing arrangement, institutions and payment institutions
should:
a. assess if the outsourcing arrangement concerns a critical or important function, as set
out in Title II;
b. assess if the supervisory conditions for outsourcing set out in Section 12.1 are met;
c. identify and assess all of the relevant risks of the outsourcing arrangement in
accordance with Section 12.2;
d. undertake appropriate due diligence on the prospective service provider in accordance
with Section 12.3;
e. identify and assess conflicts of interest that the outsourcing may cause in line with
Section 8.
12.1 Supervisory conditions for outsourcing
62. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure that the outsourcing of functions of
banking activities51 or payment services, to an extent that the performance of that function
requires authorisation or registration by a competent authority in the Member State where
they are authorised, to a service provider located in the same or another Member State takes
place only if one of the following conditions is met:
50 See also the EBA Guidelines on major incident reporting under PSD2, available under:
https://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/payment-services-and-electronic-money/guidelines-on-major-
incidents-reporting-under-psd2
51 See Article 9 CRD with regard to the prohibition of persons or undertakings other than credit institutions from carrying
out the business of taking deposits or other repayable funds from the public.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
a. the service provider is authorised or registered by a competent authority to
perform such banking activities or payment services; or
b. the service provider is otherwise allowed to carry out those banking activities or
payment services in accordance with the relevant national legal framework.
63. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure that the outsourcing of functions of
banking activities or payment services, to an extent that the performance of that function
requires authorisation or registration by a competent authority in the Member State where
they are authorised, to a service provider located in a third country takes place only if the
following conditions are met:
a. the service provider is authorised or registered to provide that banking activity or
payment service in the third country and is supervised by a relevant competent
authority in that third country (referred to as a ‘supervisory authority’);
b. there is an appropriate cooperation agreement, e.g. in the form of a memorandum
of understanding or college agreement, between the competent authorities
responsible for the supervision of the institution and the supervisory authorities
responsible for the supervision of the service provider; and
c. the cooperation agreement referred to in point (b) should ensure that the
competent authorities are able, at least, to:
i. obtain, upon request, the information necessary to carry out their
supervisory tasks pursuant to Directive 2013/36/EU, Regulation (EU) No 575/2013,
Directive (EU) 2015/2366 and Directive 2009/110/EC;
ii. obtain appropriate access to any data, documents, premises or personnel
in the third country that are relevant for the performance of their supervisory
powers;
iii. receive, as soon as possible, information from the supervisory authority in
the third country for investigating apparent breaches of the requirements of
Directive 2013/36/EU, Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, Directive (EU) 2015/2366 and
Directive 2009/110/EC; and
iv. cooperate with the relevant supervisory authorities in the third country on
enforcement in the case of a breach of the applicable regulatory requirements and
national law in the Member State. Cooperation should include, but not necessarily
be limited to, receiving information on potential breaches of the applicable
regulatory requirements from the supervisory authorities in the third country as
soon as is practicable.
12.2 Risk assessment of outsourcing arrangements
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
64. Institutions and payment institutions should assess the potential impact of outsourcing
arrangements on their operational risk, should take into account the assessment results when
deciding if the function should be outsourced to a service provider and should take appropriate
steps to avoid undue additional operational risks before entering into outsourcing
arrangements.
65. The assessment should include, where appropriate, scenarios of possible risk events, including
high-severity operational risk events. Within the scenario analysis, institutions and payment
institutions should assess the potential impact of failed or inadequate services, including the
risks caused by processes, systems, people or external events. Institutions and payment
institutions, taking into account the principle of proportionality referred to in Section 1, should
document the analysis performed and their results and should estimate the extent to which
the outsourcing arrangement would increase or decrease their operational risk. Taking into
account Title I, small and non-complex institutions and payment institutions may use
qualitative risk assessment approaches, while large or complex institutions should have a more
sophisticated approach, including, where available, the use of internal and external loss data
to inform the scenario analysis.
66. Within the risk assessment, institutions and payments institutions should also take into account
the expected benefits and costs of the proposed outsourcing arrangement, including weighing
any risks that may be reduced or better managed against any risks that may arise as a result of
the proposed outsourcing arrangement, taking into account at least:
a. concentration risks, including from:
i. outsourcing to a dominant service provider that is not easily substitutable; and
ii. multiple outsourcing arrangements with the same service provider or closely
connected service providers;
b. the aggregated risks resulting from outsourcing several functions across the institution
or payment institution and, in the case of groups of institutions or institutional
protection schemes, the aggregated risks on a consolidated basis or on the basis of the
institutional protection scheme;
c. in the case of significant institutions, the step-in risk, i.e. the risk that may result from
the need to provide financial support to a service provider in distress or to take over its
business operations; and
d. the measures implemented by the institution or payment institution and by the service
provider to manage and mitigate the risks.
67. Where the outsourcing arrangement includes the possibility that the service provider sub-
outsources critical or important functions to other service providers, institutions and payment
institutions should take into account:
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
a. the risks associated with sub-outsourcing, including the additional risks that may arise
if the sub-contractor is located in a third country or a different country from the service
provider;
b. the risk that long and complex chains of sub-outsourcing reduce the ability of
institutions or payment institutions to oversee the outsourced critical or important
function and the ability of competent authorities to effectively supervise them.
68. When carrying out the risk assessment prior to outsourcing and during ongoing monitoring of
the service provider’s performance, institutions and payment institutions should, at least:
a. identify and classify the relevant functions and related data and systems as regards
their sensitivity and required security measures;
b. conduct a thorough risk-based analysis of the functions and related data and systems
that are being considered for outsourcing or have been outsourced and address the
potential risks, in particular the operational risks, including legal, ICT, compliance and
reputational risks, and the oversight limitations related to the countries where the
outsourced services are or may be provided and where the data are or are likely to be
stored;
c. consider the consequences of where the service provider is located (within or outside
the EU);
d. consider the political stability and security situation of the jurisdictions in question,
including:
i. the laws in force, including laws on data protection;
ii. the law enforcement provisions in place; and
iii. the insolvency law provisions that would apply in the event of a service provider’s
failure and any constraints that would arise in respect of the urgent recovery of
the institution’s or payment institution’s data in particular;
e. define and decide on an appropriate level of protection of data confidentiality, of
continuity of the activities outsourced and of the integrity and traceability of data and
systems in the context of the intended outsourcing. Institutions and payment
institutions should also consider specific measures, where necessary, for data in transit,
data in memory and data at rest, such as the use of encryption technologies in
combination with an appropriate key management architecture;
f. consider whether the service provider is a subsidiary or parent undertaking of the
institution, is included in the scope of accounting consolidation or is a member of or
owned by institutions that are members of an institutional protection scheme and, if
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
so, the extent to which the institution controls it or has the ability to influence its
actions in line with Section 2.
12.3 Due diligence
69. Before entering into an outsourcing arrangement and considering the operational risks related
to the function to be outsourced, institutions and payment institutions should ensure in their
selection and assessment process that the service provider is suitable.
70. With regard to critical and important functions, institutions and payment institutions should
ensure that the service provider has the business reputation, appropriate and sufficient
abilities, the expertise, the capacity, the resources (e.g. human, IT, financial), the organisational
structure and, if applicable, the required regulatory authorisation(s) or registration(s) to
perform the critical or important function in a reliable and professional manner to meet its
obligations over the duration of the draft contract.
71. Additional factors to be considered when conducting due diligence on a potential service
provider include, but are not limited to:
a. its business model, nature, scale, complexity, financial situation, ownership and group
structure;
b. the long-term relationships with service providers that have already been assessed and
perform services for the institution or payment institution;
c. whether the service provider is a parent undertaking or subsidiary of the institution or
payment institution, is part of the accounting scope of consolidation of the institution
or is a member of or is owned by institutions that are members of the same institutional
protection scheme to which the institution belongs;
d. whether or not the service provider is supervised by competent authorities.
72. Where outsourcing involves the processing of personal or confidential data, institutions and
payment institutions should be satisfied that the service provider implements appropriate
technical and organisational measures to protect the data.
73. Institutions and payment institutions should take appropriate steps to ensure that service
providers act in a manner consistent with their values and code of conduct. In particular, with
regard to service providers located in third countries and, if applicable, their sub-contractors,
institutions and payment institutions should be satisfied that the service provider acts in an
ethical and socially responsible manner and adheres to international standards on human rights
(e.g. the European Convention on Human Rights), environmental protection and appropriate
working conditions, including the prohibition of child labour.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
13 Contractual phase
74. The rights and obligations of the institution, the payment institution and the service provider
should be clearly allocated and set out in a written agreement.
75. The outsourcing agreement for critical or important functions should set out at least:
a. a clear description of the outsourced function to be provided;
b. the start date and end date, where applicable, of the agreement and the notice periods
for the service provider and the institution or payment institution;
c. the governing law of the agreement;
d. the parties’ financial obligations;
e. whether the sub-outsourcing of a critical or important function, or material parts
thereof, is permitted and, if so, the conditions specified in Section 13.1 that the sub-
outsourcing is subject to;
f. the location(s) (i.e. regions or countries) where the critical or important function will
be provided and/or where relevant data will be kept and processed, including the
possible storage location, and the conditions to be met, including a requirement to
notify the institution or payment institution if the service provider proposes to change
the location(s);
g. where relevant, provisions regarding the accessibility, availability, integrity, privacy and
safety of relevant data, as specified in Section 13.2;
h. the right of the institution or payment institution to monitor the service provider’s
performance on an ongoing basis;
i. the agreed service levels, which should include precise quantitative and qualitative
performance targets for the outsourced function to allow for timely monitoring so that
appropriate corrective action can be taken without undue delay if the agreed service
levels are not met;
j. the reporting obligations of the service provider to the institution or payment
institution, including the communication by the service provider of any development
that may have a material impact on the service provider’s ability to effectively carry out
the critical or important function in line with the agreed service levels and in
compliance with applicable laws and regulatory requirements and, as appropriate, the
obligations to submit reports of the internal audit function of the service provider;
k. whether the service provider should take mandatory insurance against certain risks
and, if applicable, the level of insurance cover requested;
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
l. the requirements to implement and test business contingency plans;
m. provisions that ensure that the data that are owned by the institution or payment
institution can be accessed in the case of the insolvency, resolution or discontinuation
of business operations of the service provider;
n. the obligation of the service provider to cooperate with the competent authorities and
resolution authorities of the institution or payment institution, including other persons
appointed by them;
o. for institutions, a clear reference to the national resolution authority’s powers,
especially to Articles 68 and 71 of Directive 2014/59/EU (BRRD), and in particular a
description of the ‘substantive obligations’ of the contract in the sense of Article 68 of
that Directive;
p. the unrestricted right of institutions, payment institutions and competent authorities
to inspect and audit the service provider with regard to, in particular, the critical or
important outsourced function, as specified in Section 13.3;
q. termination rights, as specified in Section 13.4.
13.1 Sub-outsourcing of critical or important functions
76. The outsourcing agreement should specify whether or not sub-outsourcing of critical or
important functions, or material parts thereof, is permitted.
77. If sub-outsourcing of critical or important functions is permitted, institutions and payment
institutions should determine whether the part of the function to be sub-outsourced is, as such,
critical or important (i.e. a material part of the critical or important function) and, if so, record
it in the register.
78. If sub-outsourcing of critical or important functions is permitted, the written agreement should:
a. specify any types of activities that are excluded from sub-outsourcing;
b. specify the conditions to be complied with in the case of sub-outsourcing;
c. specify that the service provider is obliged to oversee those services that it has sub-
contracted to ensure that all contractual obligations between the service provider and
the institution or payment institution are continuously met;
d. require the service provider to obtain prior specific or general written authorisation
from the institution or payment institution before sub-outsourcing data;52
52 See Article 28 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
e. include an obligation of the service provider to inform the institution or payment
institution of any planned sub-outsourcing, or material changes thereof, in particular
where that might affect the ability of the service provider to meet its responsibilities
under the outsourcing agreement. This includes planned significant changes of sub-
contractors and to the notification period; in particular, the notification period to be
set should allow the outsourcing institution or payment institution at least to carry out
a risk assessment of the proposed changes and to object to changes before the planned
sub-outsourcing, or material changes thereof, come into effect;
f. ensure, where appropriate, that the institution or payment institution has the right to
object to intended sub-outsourcing, or material changes thereof, or that explicit
approval is required;
g. ensure that the institution or payment institution has the contractual right to terminate
the agreement in the case of undue sub-outsourcing, e.g. where the sub-outsourcing
materially increases the risks for the institution or payment institution or where the
service provider sub-outsources without notifying the institution or payment
institution.
79. Institutions and payment institutions should agree to sub-outsourcing only if the sub-
contractor undertakes to:
a. comply with all applicable laws, regulatory requirements and contractual obligations;
and
b. grant the institution, payment institution and competent authority the same
contractual rights of access and audit as those granted by the service provider.
80. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure that the service provider appropriately
oversees the sub-service providers, in line with the policy defined by the institution or payment
institution. If the sub-outsourcing proposed could have material adverse effects on the
outsourcing arrangement of a critical or important function or would lead to a material increase
of risk, including where the conditions in paragraph 79 would not be met, the institution or
payment institution should exercise its right to object to the sub-outsourcing, if such a right
was agreed, and/or terminate the contract.
13.2 Security of data and systems
81. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure that service providers, where relevant,
comply with appropriate IT security standards.
82. Where relevant (e.g. in the context of cloud or other ICT outsourcing), institutions and payment
institutions should define data and system security requirements within the outsourcing
agreement and monitor compliance with these requirements on an ongoing basis.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
83. In the case of outsourcing to cloud service providers and other outsourcing arrangements that
involve the handling or transfer of personal or confidential data, institutions and payment
institutions should adopt a risk-based approach to data storage and data processing location(s)
(i.e. country or region) and information security considerations.
84. Without prejudice to the requirements under the Regulation (EU) 2016/679, institutions and
payment institutions, when outsourcing (in particular to third countries), should take into
account differences in national provisions regarding the protection of data. Institutions and
payment institutions should ensure that the outsourcing agreement includes the obligation
that the service provider protects confidential, personal or otherwise sensitive information and
complies with all legal requirements regarding the protection of data that apply to the
institution or payment institution (e.g. the protection of personal data and that banking secrecy
or similar legal confidentiality duties with respect to clients’ information, where applicable, are
observed).
13.3 Access, information and audit rights
85. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure within the written outsourcing
arrangement that the internal audit function is able to review the outsourced function using a
risk-based approach.
86. Regardless of the criticality or importance of the outsourced function, the written outsourcing
arrangements between institutions and service providers should refer to the information
gathering and investigatory powers of competent authorities and resolution authorities under
Article 63(1)(a) of Directive 2014/59/EU and Article 65(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU with regard
to service providers located in a Member State and should also ensure those rights with regard
to service providers located in third countries.
87. With regard to the outsourcing of critical or important functions, institutions and payment
institutions should ensure within the written outsourcing agreement that the service provider
grants them and their competent authorities, including resolution authorities, and any other
person appointed by them or the competent authorities, the following:
a. full access to all relevant business premises (e.g. head offices and operation centres),
including the full range of relevant devices, systems, networks, information and data
used for providing the outsourced function, including related financial information,
personnel and the service provider’s external auditors (‘access and information
rights’); and
b. unrestricted rights of inspection and auditing related to the outsourcing arrangement
(‘audit rights’), to enable them to monitor the outsourcing arrangement and to ensure
compliance with all applicable regulatory and contractual requirements.
88. For the outsourcing of functions that are not critical or important, institutions and payment
institutions should ensure the access and audit rights as set out in paragraph 87 (a) and (b) and
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Section 13.3, on a risk-based approach, considering the nature of the outsourced function and
the related operational and reputational risks, its scalability, the potential impact on the
continuous performance of its activities and the contractual period. Institutions and payment
institutions should take into account that functions may become critical or important over time.
89. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure that the outsourcing agreement or any
other contractual arrangement does not impede or limit the effective exercise of the access
and audit rights by them, competent authorities or third parties appointed by them to exercise
these rights.
90. Institutions and payment institutions should exercise their access and audit rights, determine
the audit frequency and areas to be audited on a risk-based approach and adhere to relevant,
commonly accepted, national and international audit standards.53
91. Without prejudice to their final responsibility regarding outsourcing arrangements, institutions
and payment institutions may use:
a. pooled audits organised jointly with other clients of the same service provider, and
performed by them and these clients or by a third party appointed by them, to use
audit resources more efficiently and to decrease the organisational burden on both the
clients and the service provider;
b. third-party certifications and third-party or internal audit reports, made available by
the service provider.
92. For the outsourcing of critical or important functions, institutions and payment institutions
should assess whether third-party certifications and reports as referred to in paragraph 91(b)
are adequate and sufficient to comply with their regulatory obligations and should not rely
solely on these reports over time.
93. Institutions and payment institutions should make use of the method referred to in
paragraph 91(b) only if they:
a. are satisfied with the audit plan for the outsourced function;
b. ensure that the scope of the certification or audit report covers the systems (i.e.
processes, applications, infrastructure, data centres, etc.) and key controls identified
by the institution or payment institution and the compliance with relevant regulatory
requirements;
c. thoroughly assess the content of the certifications or audit reports on an ongoing basis
and verify that the reports or certifications are not obsolete;
53 For institutions, please refer to Section 22 of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance:
https://eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1972987/Final+Guidelines+on+Internal+Governance+%28EBA-GL-2017-
11%29.pdf/eb859955-614a-4afb-bdcd-aaa664994889
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
d. ensure that key systems and controls are covered in future versions of the certification
or audit report;
e. are satisfied with the aptitude of the certifying or auditing party (e.g. with regard to
rotation of the certifying or auditing company, qualifications, expertise, re-
performance/verification of the evidence in the underlying audit file);
f. are satisfied that the certifications are issued and the audits are performed against
widely recognised relevant professional standards and include a test of the operational
effectiveness of the key controls in place;
g. have the contractual right to request the expansion of the scope of the certifications or
audit reports to other relevant systems and controls; the number and frequency of such
requests for scope modification should be reasonable and legitimate from a risk
management perspective; and
h. retain the contractual right to perform individual audits at their discretion with regard
to the outsourcing of critical or important functions.
94. In line with the EBA Guidelines on ICT risk assessment under the SREP, institutions should,
where relevant, ensure that they are able to carry out security penetration testing to assess the
effectiveness of implemented cyber and internal ICT security measures and processes.54 Taking
into account Title I, payment institutions should also have internal ICT control mechanisms,
including ICT security control and mitigation measures.
95. Before a planned on-site visit, institutions, payment institutions, competent authorities and
auditors or third parties acting on behalf of the institution, payment institution or competent
authorities should provide reasonable notice to the service provider, unless this is not possible
due to an emergency or crisis situation or would lead to a situation where the audit would no
longer be effective.
96. When performing audits in multi-client environments, care should be taken to ensure that risks
to another client’s environment (e.g. impact on service levels, availability of data,
confidentiality aspects) are avoided or mitigated.
97. Where the outsourcing arrangement carries a high level of technical complexity, for instance in
the case of cloud outsourcing, the institution or payment institution should verify that whoever
is performing the audit – whether it is its internal auditors, the pool of auditors or external
auditors acting on its behalf – has appropriate and relevant skills and knowledge to perform
relevant audits and/or assessments effectively. The same applies to any staff of the institution
or payment institution reviewing third-party certifications or audits carried out by service
providers.
54 See also EBA Guidelines on ICT risk:
https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1841624/Final+Guidelines+on+ICT+Risk+Assessment+under+SREP+%28
EBA-GL-2017-05%29.pdf/ef88884a-2f04-48a1-8208-3b8c85b2f69a
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
13.4 Termination rights
98. The outsourcing arrangement should expressly allow the possibility for the institution or
payment institution to terminate the arrangement, in accordance with applicable law, including
in the following situations:
a. where the provider of the outsourced functions is in a breach of applicable law,
regulations or contractual provisions;
b. where impediments capable of altering the performance of the outsourced function
are identified;
c. where there are material changes affecting the outsourcing arrangement or the service
provider (e.g. sub-outsourcing or changes of sub-contractors);
d. where there are weaknesses regarding the management and security of confidential,
personal or otherwise sensitive data or information; and
e. where instructions are given by the institution’s or payment institution’s competent
authority, e.g. in the case that the competent authority is, caused by the outsourcing
arrangement, no longer in a position to effectively supervise the institution or payment
institution.
99. The outsourcing arrangement should facilitate the transfer of the outsourced function to
another service provider or its re-incorporation into the institution or payment institution. To
this end, the written outsourcing arrangement should:
a. clearly set out the obligations of the existing service provider, in the case of a transfer
of the outsourced function to another service provider or back to the institution or
payment institution, including the treatment of data;
b. set an appropriate transition period, during which the service provider, after the
termination of the outsourcing arrangement, would continue to provide the
outsourced function to reduce the risk of disruptions; and
c. include an obligation of the service provider to support the institution or payment
institution in the orderly transfer of the function in the event of the termination of the
outsourcing agreement.
14 Oversight of outsourced functions
100. Institutions and payment institutions should monitor, on an ongoing basis, the
performance of the service providers with regard to all outsourcing arrangements on a risk-
based approach and with the main focus being on the outsourcing of critical or important
functions, including that the availability, integrity and security of data and information is
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
ensured. Where the risk, nature or scale of an outsourced function has materially changed,
institutions and payment institutions should reassess the criticality or importance of that
function in line with Section 4.
101. Institutions and payment institutions should apply due skill, care and diligence when
monitoring and managing outsourcing arrangements.
102. Institutions should regularly update their risk assessment in accordance with
Section 12.2and should periodically report to the management body on the risks identified in
respect of the outsourcing of critical or important functions.
103. Institutions and payment institutions should monitor and manage their internal
concentration risks caused by outsourcing arrangements, taking into account Section 12.2 of
these guidelines.
104. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure, on an ongoing basis, that outsourcing
arrangements, with the main focus being on outsourced critical or important functions, meet
appropriate performance and quality standards in line with their policies by:
a. ensuring that they receive appropriate reports from service providers;
b. evaluating the performance of service providers using tools such as key performance
indicators, key control indicators, service delivery reports, self-certification and
independent reviews; and
c. reviewing all other relevant information received from the service provider, including
reports on business continuity measures and testing.
105. Institutions should take appropriate measures if they identify shortcomings in the provision
of the outsourced function. In particular, institutions and payment institutions should follow
up on any indications that service providers may not be carrying out the outsourced critical or
important function effectively or in compliance with applicable laws and regulatory
requirements. If shortcomings are identified, institutions and payment institutions should take
appropriate corrective or remedial actions. Such actions may include terminating the
outsourcing agreement, with immediate effect, if necessary.
15 Exit strategies
106. Institutions and payment institutions should have a documented exit strategy when
outsourcing critical or important functions that is in line with their outsourcing policy and
business continuity plans,55 taking into account at least the possibility of:
55 Institutions, in line with the requirements under Article 85(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU and Title VI of the EBA Guidelines
on internal governance, and payment institutions should have appropriate business continuity plans in place with regard
to the outsourcing of critical or important functions.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
a. the termination of outsourcing arrangements;
b. the failure of the service provider;
c. the deterioration of the quality of the function provided and actual or potential
business disruptions caused by the inappropriate or failed provision of the function;
d. material risks arising for the appropriate and continuous application of the function.
107. Institutions and payment institutions should ensure that they are able to exit outsourcing
arrangements without undue disruption to their business activities, without limiting their
compliance with regulatory requirements and without any detriment to the continuity and
quality of its provision of services to clients. To achieve this, they should:
a. develop and implement exit plans that are comprehensive, documented and, where
appropriate, sufficiently tested (e.g. by carrying out an analysis of the potential costs,
impacts, resources and timing implications of transferring an outsourced service to an
alternative provider); and
b. identify alternative solutions and develop transition plans to enable the institution or
payment institution to remove outsourced functions and data from the service
provider and transfer them to alternative providers or back to the institution or
payment institution or to take other measures that ensure the continuous provision of
the critical or important function or business activity in a controlled and sufficiently
tested manner, taking into account the challenges that may arise because of the
location of data and taking the necessary measures to ensure business continuity
during the transition phase.
108. When developing exit strategies, institutions and payment institutions should:
a. define the objectives of the exit strategy;
b. perform a business impact analysis that is commensurate with the risk of the
outsourced processes, services or activities, with the aim of identifying what human
and financial resources would be required to implement the exit plan and how much
time it would take;
c. assign roles, responsibilities and sufficient resources to manage exit plans and the
transition of activities;
d. define success criteria for the transition of outsourced functions and data; and
e. define the indicators to be used for the monitoring of the outsourcing arrangement (as
outlined under Section 14), including indicators based on unacceptable service levels
that should trigger the exit.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Title V – Guidelines on outsourcing addressed to competent
authorities
109. When establishing appropriate methods to monitor institutions’ and payment institutions’
compliance with the conditions for initial authorisation, competent authorities should aim to
identify if outsourcing arrangements amount to a material change to the conditions and
obligations of institutions’ and payment institutions’ initial authorisation.
110. Competent authorities should be satisfied that they can effectively supervise institutions
and payment institutions, including that institutions or payment institutions have ensured
within their outsourcing arrangement that service providers are obliged to grant audit and
access rights to the competent authority and the institution, in line with Section 13.3.
111. The analysis of institutions’ outsourcing risks should be performed at least within the SREP
or, with regard to payment institutions, as part of other supervisory processes, including ad-
hoc requests, or during on-site inspections.
112. Further to the information recorded within the register, as referred to in Section 11,
competent authorities may ask institutions and payment institutions for additional
information, in particular for critical or important outsourcing arrangements, such as:
a. the detailed risk analysis;
b. whether the service provider has a business continuity plan that is suitable for the
services provided to the outsourcing institution or payment institution;
c. the exit strategy for use if the outsourcing arrangement is terminated by either party
or if there is disruption to the provision of the services; and
d. the resources and measures in place to adequately monitor the outsourced activities.
113. In addition to the information required under Section 11, competent authorities may
require institutions and payment institutions to provide detailed information on any
outsourcing arrangement, even if the function concerned is not considered critical or
important.
114. Competent authorities should assess the following on a risk-based approach:
a. whether institutions and payment institutions monitor and manage appropriately, in
particular, critical or important outsourcing arrangements;
b. whether institutions and payment institutions have sufficient resources in place to
monitor and manage outsourcing arrangements;
c. whether institutions and payment institutions identify and manage all relevant risks;
and
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
d. whether institutions and payment institutions identify, assess and appropriately
manage conflicts of interest with regard to outsourcing arrangements, e.g. in the case
of intragroup outsourcing or outsourcing within the same institutional protection
scheme.
115. Competent authorities should ensure that EU/EEA institutions and payment institutions are
not operating as an ‘empty shell’, including situations where institutions use back-to-back
transactions or intragroup transactions to transfer part of the market risk and credit risk to a
non-EU/EEA entity, and should ensure that they have appropriate governance and risk
management arrangements in place to identify and manage their risks.
116. Within their assessment, competent authorities should take into account all risks, in
particular:56
a. the operational risks57 posed by the outsourcing arrangement;
b. reputational risks;
c. the step-in risk that could require the institution to bail out a service provider, in the
case of significant institutions;
d. concentration risks within the institution, including on a consolidated basis, caused by
multiple outsourcing arrangements with a single service provider or closely connected
service providers or multiple outsourcing arrangements within the same business area;
e. concentration risks at the sector level, e.g. where multiple institutions or payment
institutions make use of a single service provider or a small group of service providers;
f. the extent to which the outsourcing institution or payment institution controls the
service provider or has the ability to influence its actions, the reduction of risks that
may result from a higher level of control and if the service provider is included in the
consolidated supervision of the group; and
g. conflicts of interest between the institution and the service provider.
117. Where concentration risks are identified, competent authorities should monitor the
development of such risks and evaluate both their potential impact on other institutions and
payment institutions and the stability of the financial market; competent authorities should
inform, where appropriate, the resolution authority about new potentially critical functions58
that have been identified during this assessment.
56 For institutions subject to Directive 2013/36/EU, see also the EBA Guidelines on SREP:
https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/supervisory-review-and-evaluation-srep-and-pillar-2
57 See also the EBA Guidelines on ICT risk:
https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1841624/Final+Guidelines+on+ICT+Risk+Assessment+under+SREP+%28
EBA-GL-2017-05%29.pdf/ef88884a-2f04-48a1-8208-3b8c85b2f69a
58 As defined under Article 2(1)(35) BRRD.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
118. Where concerns are identified that lead to the conclusion that an institution or payment
institution no longer has robust governance arrangements in place or does not comply with
regulatory requirements, competent authorities should take appropriate actions, which may
include limiting or restricting the scope of the outsourced functions or requiring exit from one
or more outsourcing arrangements. In particular, taking into account the need of the institution
or payment institution to operate on a continuous basis, the cancellation of contracts could be
required if the supervision and enforcement of regulatory requirements cannot be ensured by
other measures.
119. Competent authorities should be satisfied that they are able to perform effective
supervision, in particular when institutions and payment institutions outsource critical or
important functions that are undertaken outside the EU/EEA.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
5. Accompanying documents
5.1 Draft cost-benefit analysis/impact assessment
Article 16(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
24 November 2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority)
(the EBA Regulation) provides that the EBA should carry out an analysis of ‘the potential related
costs and benefits’ of any guidelines it develops. This analysis should provide an overview of the
findings regarding the problem to be dealt with, the solutions proposed and the potential impact
of these options.
A. Problem identification
The CEBS guidelines on outsourcing, published in 2006, were applicable exclusively to credit
institutions and needed to be replaced by EBA guidelines applicable to all institutions and payment
institutions to establish a more harmonised framework for the outsourcing arrangements of all
financial institutions in the scope of the EBA’s action. The update was also necessary to take into
account changes within EU legislation. In addition, outsourcing to third countries may change in
volume after the UK’s notification of its intention to leave the EU. Furthermore, the scope and
nature of outsourcing arrangements have changed over time and, in particular, the outsourcing of
IT processes and infrastructures became more common. High concentrations of IT services at a
limited number of service providers have the potential to lead to risks for the stability of the
financial market, particularly if no additional safeguards would be implemented.
B. Policy objectives
To ensure a level playing field and to meet the requirements of the CRD, PSD2 and EMD, the EBA is
now updating the guidelines issued by its predecessor to establish one common framework for the
outsourcing of all financial institutions within the scope of the EBA’s action.
To cater for the principle of proportionality and in accordance with the approach taken in the MiFID
II and PSD2, the guidelines require that the outsourcing of critical or important functions be
identified and impose stricter requirements on such outsourcing compared with other outsourcing
arrangements.
The guidelines aim to clarify the supervisory expectations regarding outsourcing to service
providers, including service providers located in third countries, to ensure that outsourcing is
performed in an orderly manner and not performed to an extent that would lead to the setting up
of empty shells that no longer have the substance to remain authorised.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
The guidelines aim to ensure that competent authorities are able to identify concentrations of
outsourcing arrangements at service providers based on documentation provided by institutions
and payment institutions, to identify and manage risks to the stability of the financial system.
C. Baseline scenario
Outsourcing requirements are currently specified in the CEBS guidelines on outsourcing. In
addition, the EBA has published a recommendation on outsourcing to cloud service providers.
Outsourcing by firms performing investment services is regulated under MiFID II and Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565. Outsourcing by payment institutions is regulated under the
PSD2.
Institutions should comply with the CRD. Article 74 CRD requires institutions to have robust
governance arrangements, which include a clear organisational structure with well-defined,
transparent and consistent lines of responsibility, effective processes to identify, manage, monitor
and report the risks they are or they might be exposed to and adequate internal control
mechanisms. The EBA Guidelines on internal governance sufficiently specify the requirements,
including the need for institutions to have appropriate outsourcing policies (see Section 8 of the
guidelines); in addition, outsourcing needs to be approved as part of the institution’s new product
approval and change processes (see Section 18 of the guidelines).
Article 76 CRD sets out requirements for the involvement of the management body in risk
management and Article 88 CRD sets out the responsibilities of the management body regarding
governance arrangements; in both cases, the requirements are relevant for outsourced activities.
According to Article 11 PSD2, competent authorities should grant an authorisation only if, taking
into account the need to ensure the sound and prudent management of a payment institution, the
payment institution has robust governance arrangements for its payment services business, which
include a clear organisational structure with well-defined, transparent and consistent lines of
responsibility, effective procedures to identify, manage, monitor and report the risks to which it is
or might be exposed, and adequate internal control mechanisms, including sound administrative
and accounting procedures; those arrangements, procedures and mechanisms must be
comprehensive and proportionate to the nature, scale and complexity of the payment services
provided by the payment institution.
Institutions and payment institutions must ensure that sensitive data, including personal data, is
adequately protected and kept confidential. Institutions must comply with the GDPR.
All of the above forms the baseline scenario of the impact assessment, which focuses only on the
additional costs and benefits created by the guidelines on outsourcing.
D. Options considered
1) Scope of application
Option A: applying the guidelines only to credit institutions (as in the previous CEBS guidelines).
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Option B: applying the guidelines to all credit institutions and investment firms (both referred to as
‘institutions’) that are subject to the CRD, payment institutions that are subject to the PSD2 and
electronic money institutions subject to the EMD (both referred to as ‘payment institutions’).
Firms providing investment services are subject to the specific provisions on outsourcing included
in MiFID II and Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565 of 25 April 2016 supplementing
MiFID II.
MiFID II and PSD2 already set out a framework for outsourcing. An application limited to credit
institutions and their banking activities would be sufficient to complete the framework on
outsourcing. However, such an approach (Option A) would potentially lead to inconsistencies
between the different frameworks and to a situation in which there is not a level playing field
between investment firms, payment institutions, electronic money institutions and credit
institutions. In particular, credit institutions would need to implement separate arrangements for
the different types of activities.
The EBA’s scope of action covers not only credit institutions and investment firms subject to the
CRD, but also payment and electronic money institutions. While the guidelines would cover all
those institutions and payment institutions, the guidelines would not directly be addressed to
account information service providers registered only for this service, credit intermediaries or non-
bank creditors. Outsourcing arrangements between institutions and payment institutions and such
entities are within the scope of the guidelines, as the requirements are addressed to institutions
and payment institutions. Such an approach (Option B), if the requirements are aligned with the
provisions within MiFID II and the supplemental Commission Delegated Regulation and within the
PSD2, would establish a level playing field between different types of financial institutions and
ensure that credit institutions can implement one framework for the outsourcing of their activities
governed by different directives. The specific aspects of intragroup outsourcing and outsourcing
within institutional protection schemes will be considered.
Option B has been retained.
2) Transitional arrangements
Option A: setting an implementation period of the guidelines of one year, but without transitional
arrangements.
Option B: setting the regular implementation period of six months and setting out transitional
arrangements to ensure that institutions can review contracts, update the assessment of the
criticality or importance of outsourcing and set up a register and update the documentation in line
with the requirements.
Option B1: setting a fixed transitional period of around two years to review contracts, perform
assessments and complete the register.
Option B2: setting a period of around two years (other than for outsourcing arrangements to cloud
service providers, for which the EBA recommendation already applies), but requiring
documentation and assessments to be updated if existing outsourcing arrangements are renewed
during that period. For critical or important arrangements, closer supervisory attention should be
applied and, after the transitional period, their reassessment should be monitored.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
All options would be effective to achieve the desired prudential outcome to have all outsourcing
arrangements documented in a way that differentiates between critical and important outsourcing,
sets out a framework for such outsourcing and allows for the submission of a register to competent
authorities.
Option A would delay the implementation of a common framework on outsourcing. Option A would
lead to time pressure to re-assess the criticality or importance of outsourcing arrangements and
update the register and this option might therefore increase the implementation costs. In addition,
it might not be possible to renegotiate multiple outsourcing arrangements in a relatively short time
period. Therefore, Option A has not been retained.
Options B1 and B2 would both ensure that institutions and payment institutions have sufficient
time to update their assessments and documentation. However, Option B1 would raise challenges,
as contracts would need to be renegotiated within that time period, which may not always be
possible.
Option B2 would lead to a faster update than Option B1 for arrangements that are renewed during
the transitional period, but without additional burden, as an assessment of renewed outsourcing
arrangements would include the assessment of the related risks. Updating the documentation in
that context would be possible without causing material additional costs. Option B2 would have
some impact on the available time frame for the development of a database that could hold the
register. However, for this task, the regular implementation period should be sufficient. Additional
scrutiny would be applied to critical or important outsourcing arrangements that are updated only
after the transitional period. While this would lead to additional costs for competent authorities for
the monitoring of the transition, it would reduce the costs of institutions, as the time pressure for
renegotiation of contracts or, in some cases, exit from arrangements (where there is no
renegotiation possible that ensures compliance with the guidelines) would be reduced.
Option B2 has been retained, as it provides more flexibility but still ensures the effective supervision
of outsourcing arrangements.
3) Definition of outsourcing and the approach regarding the outsourcing of critical and important
functions
Option A: relying on the definition provided in MiFID II and the Commission Delegated Regulation
and the approach to set more detailed requirements for the outsourcing of critical and important
functions.
Option B: the same as Option A, but also setting a lighter framework for other outsourcing
arrangements.
Option C: creating a more narrow definition for the outsourcing of banking services.
Using a common definition (Option A) ensures that institutions can implement a single framework
for outsourcing regarding all of their activities and develop a good understanding of the scope of
outsourcing. A focus on the outsourcing of critical or important functions should reduce the
administrative costs of applying the guidelines. However, the assessment of the criticality or
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
importance includes judgemental elements and therefore institutions, payment institutions and
competent authorities may sometimes disagree regarding the assessment result. Retroactively
introducing safeguards for the outsourcing of critical or important functions, also in cases where
the assessment changes over time, could lead to additional costs and situations where necessary
contractual changes are difficult to agree on. In addition, the overall impact of outsourcing
arrangements that are themselves not critical or important might become relevant for the
supervision of an institution.
Under Option B, the impact described under Option A would apply; in addition, some requirements
for all outsourcing would be imposed, taking into account the principle of proportionality. This
would lead to only a minor additional administrative burden, as institutions would already need to
have in place some processes to manage all of their arrangements with third parties. In any case,
also for other outsourcing arrangements, institutions would already need to apply sound processes
and would need to document the arrangements to ensure that they have robust governance
arrangements in place. Having guidelines in place that specify the regulatory minimum expectations
for such non-critical or non-important arrangements would provide a higher level of legal certainty.
Costs for adjustments of internal processes should be minor. It would be ensured that the
outsourcing process would be subject to a prescribed set of controls, which should mitigate the
additional measures that would need to be taken if an outsourcing arrangement became critical or
important over time, e.g. because of the scalability of the arrangement.
A narrower definition of outsourcing (Option C) for banking activities would limit the number of
outsourcing arrangements and this would, at first sight, reduce the administrative costs of applying
the guidelines. However, the framework should ensure a sufficient focus on the outsourcing of
critical or important functions and, by doing so, this would limit the administrative burden. A
different definition would require different frameworks for different activities (e.g. banking versus
investment services) and would lead to challenges in their application, as some arrangements affect
banking, but also investment and payment services (e.g. underlying IT infrastructures). Therefore,
Option C is not effective.
Option B has been retained.
4) Specification of the basic requirements on governance arrangements, outsourcing policy,
conflicts of interest, business continuity and internal audit function that are, in principle, covered
already in the EBA Guidelines on internal governance
Option A: the guidelines should not specify such requirements, as the EBA Guidelines on internal
governance are sufficient.
Option B: the guidelines should specify the additional aspects that are specific in terms of
outsourcing.
The guidelines on internal governance do not apply to payment institutions; therefore, Option A
would be less effective than Option B, even if one were to take into account the fact that the
prudential risks within such institutions would be low compared with institutions that are subject
to the CRD. This option would also not provide legal certainty in the same way as Option B.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
The inclusion of the aspects listed (Option B) provides certainty regarding the supervisory
expectations and ensures that there are safeguards within institutions not covered by the CRD; this
option also provides legal certainty and clarity regarding supervisory expectations for institutions
subject to the CRD. This is desirable to achieve harmonisation, but also because of consumer
protection aspects (e.g. the continuous functioning of payment services should be ensured).
Option B has been retained.
5) Documentation requirements and the submission of documentation to competent authorities
Documentation should be comprehensive, provide an appropriate overview on outsourcing
arrangements (including the main risks identified regarding the outsourcing of critical and
important functions) and allow for the identification of concentration risks on a micro level by
institutions and payment institutions and on both a micro and a macro level by competent
authorities.
Option A: requiring institutions and payment institutions to document all outsourcing
arrangements, but without specifying further requirements.
Option B: requiring institutions and payment institutions to document all outsourcing
arrangements and to maintain a register for all existing outsourcing arrangements.
Option B1: limiting the register to only the outsourcing of critical and important functions.
Option B2: having all outsourcing arrangements documented in the register, but with the extent of
documentation that is required differing between critical or important functions and other
outsourcing.
Option C: the same as Option B, but requiring that planned outsourcing arrangements also have to
be documented in the register as soon as their implementation is likely.
Option D: in addition to requiring a register, requiring institutions and payment institutions to liaise
with competent authorities regarding all new outsourcing arrangements of critical and important
functions, but leaving the details to the competent authorities.
Option E: the same as Option D, but requiring prior approval or a non-objection procedure
implemented by the competent authority.
Option A would not necessarily result in a comprehensive register that would be readily available
for submission to the competent authority and would allow neither institutions nor their
competent authorities to efficiently identify risk concentrations. A requirement to have a register
of all cloud outsourcing arrangements already exists. Option A therefore has not been retained.
Option B would ensure that institutions, payment institutions and competent authorities have an
overview of all relevant outsourcing arrangements and would be in a position to assess risk
concentrations. By defining a minimum set of aspects to be documented, this option would ensure
that there is sufficient information available to assess the risk posed by outsourcing, e.g. within the
SREP. The information should be limited to reduce the burden. Additional information could always
be requested by competent authorities.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Option B1 would lead to slightly lower costs, as not all outsourcing arrangements would need to be
included in the register. However, documentation would be necessary in any case. By including at
least a limited set of information (Option B2) for all other outsourcing arrangements, the
identification of concentration risks would be even better than in Option B1. As a register would
already exist, the costs would be low, as the costs would be limited to those involved in the input
of a few additional data points into the register. Option B2 would be more efficient than Option B1.
Adding planned outsourcing to the register (Option C) would give competent authorities the
possibility to evaluate the potential effect of upcoming outsourcing arrangements combined with
other existing outsourcing arrangements. However, it would also lead to a situation where
institutions and payment institutions would enter potential arrangements that would not come
into effect, leading to minor additional costs for adding such arrangements to the register.
However, if arrangements were entered into the register only if they were nearly certain, they
would be entered relatively quickly and therefore this process might not ensure that competent
authorities were informed in a timely manner about upcoming outsourcing arrangements.
Option D would ensure that competent authorities would be informed about upcoming outsourcing
arrangements and would have the opportunity to intervene if they had concerns about potential
risks or if such an arrangement would lead to a situation where the institution would become an
empty shall that lacked the substance for ongoing authorisation. The impact on costs for
institutions and payment institutions would be low, but if feedback from the competent authority
(Option E) was expected, this might delay the implementation of arrangements and could therefore
lead to additional costs. In most jurisdictions, such processes (Option D) already exist and therefore
the costs would be limited to jurisdictions where no prior discussion had taken place. A dialogue
between institutions and competent authorities regarding outsourcing improves the effective
supervision of firms.
Options B2 and D have been retained.
6) Guidelines on the assessment of risks and the criticality or importance of outsourced functions
and their continued monitoring
Option A: the guidelines would leave it up to institutions and payment institutions to develop their
own assessment framework.
Option B: the guidelines would specify, in line with MiFID II and PSD2 requirements, the approach
for assessing the criticality or importance of functions.
Option C: the guidelines would specify a framework for the ongoing monitoring of outsourcing
arrangements.
Option A would not be effective, as it would not lead to the desired level of harmonisation of the
assessment results.
Option B would ensure that there would be one harmonised framework that takes into account the
assessment criteria provided in MiFID II and PSD2, but would provide additional criteria for the
assessment of the impact of outsourcing arrangements. Assessing the operational risk impact is
one aspect that is relevant for determining if an outsourced function is critical or important. Such
risks include the so-called step-in risk that may be triggered if the service provider were in financial
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
distress and needed financial support by the institution or payment institution to maintain the
services provided; this is particularly relevant for significant institutions. A harmonised set of
criteria to be implemented by institutions and payment institutions would not create greater costs
than if institutions defined their own framework. However, where there is already a framework in
place that is in line with the MiFID II and PSD2 requirements, institutions would have one-off costs
for adjusting that framework.
Option C would ensure that changes to the criticality or importance of outsourcing arrangements
would be identified by all institutions and payment institutions. Under Option C, the guidelines
would provide a more specific framework for monitoring outsourcing risks than the EBA Guidelines
on internal governance, which are applicable to institutions subject to the CRD only. Option C would
be effective. Additional costs would be limited to adjustments to the already existing risk
management framework.
Options B and C have been retained.
7) Outsourcing of banking activities and payment services that require authorisation by a
competent authority
Although most outsourcing arrangements involve activities or services (or parts thereof) that do
not, in themselves, require authorisation by a competent authority, institutions may occasionally
want to outsource functions or parts of banking or payment services or activities, to an extent that
would require authorisation or registration in their Member State, to service providers located in
third countries. The outsourcing of investment services is regulated under Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2017/565 of 25 April 2016.
The outsourced parts of banking activities or payment services may themselves require
authorisation. However, the full service or activity, i.e. including the responsibility for the service or
activity, can never be outsourced. While, within the EU, a common framework for authorisation
and supervision applies, outsourcing to third countries would, in most cases, not be subject to the
same framework. Therefore, this specific type of outsourcing arrangement should be allowed only
if:
 the service provider in the third country is authorised by or registered at a relevant
supervisory authority to perform the activity or service; and
 the outsourcing arrangement will not undermine the ability of the competent authority in
the Member State to effectively supervise the outsourcing institution or payment
institution. This will commonly require that the competent authority is able to receive the
information needed for its supervisory tasks and exercise access and audit rights in the
third country and that there exist mechanisms for the exchange of information on
enforcement matters.
Two policy options have been considered.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Option A would allow the outsourcing of banking and payment activities or services, which are
subject to authorisation or registration, to third countries only if there is an appropriate
cooperation agreement between the competent authority of the institution and the supervisory
authority of the service provider.
Option B would be an outcomes-focused approach and would require institutions and payment
institutions to be satisfied that any proposed outsourcing of functions (or parts of banking or
payment services or activities) that require direct authorisation to service providers located in third
countries would not prevent or undermine the ability of competent authorities in their Member
State to effectively supervise them. Competent authorities would have the power to take measures
if effective supervision were not possible.
Option A would be in line with the approach for investment services under Article 32 of the
Commissions Delegated Regulation, which requires such a cooperation agreement in the case of
outsourcing functions of portfolio management; it ensures that the rights and responsibilities of
the competent authority and the supervisory authority would be set out in writing.
However, such an approach would also require competent authorities to enter into multiple,
lengthy negotiations with third countries to conclude the required cooperation agreements, even
if institutions and payment institutions would need to be satisfied that there is a cooperation
agreement between the competent authority of the institution or payment institution and the
competent authority in the third country responsible for supervising such services or activities
where they outsource those banking and payment activities or services. If a cooperation agreement
does not exist, then outsourcing of banking and payment activities or services into the third country
is not possible.
Option B recognises that effective supervision could be achieved through a variety of arrangements
and mechanisms, including, but not necessarily limited to, cooperation agreements or supervisory
colleges. Although more flexible and pragmatic, Option B would require competent authorities to
determine that they can effectively discharge their supervisory duties in practice. In particular,
competent authorities need to be satisfied that they will not be faced with restrictions regarding
the exercise of information, access and audit rights. This is clearly more difficult without signing a
cooperation agreement. Competent authorities would also need to reserve the right to require
institutions and payment institutions to not enter into or terminate existing outsourcing
agreements if the outsourcing concerned an activity or service that was itself subject to
authorisation, if the competent authorities were not satisfied that they would be able to effectively
supervise it. This approach would lead to legal uncertainty about the possibility of outsourcing
functions to service providers in third countries.
Option A has been retained.
8) Setting minimum requirements for outsourcing contracts
To ensure that documentation requirements can be met, institutions and payment institutions
need to have written arrangements in place that at least reflect the documentation requirements.
Option A: the guidelines would not set out additional contractual provisions above the
aforementioned aspects.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Option B: the guidelines would define the minimum content of outsourcing arrangements,
differentiating between critical or important outsourcing and other outsourcing. In particular, the
guidelines would deal with the aspect of audit and access rights.
Option A would be in line with the principle of contractual freedom and the principle that the
institution or payment institution is responsible for its outsourcing arrangements. Requirements
specified in MiFID II and PSD2 would have to be met. However, such a guideline would not provide
sufficient clarity regarding audit and access rights and other aspects that facilitate the appropriate
management of outsourcing arrangements (e.g. termination and exit rights).
Option B would help institutions and payment institutions to agree on contracts that meet the
minimum requirements expected by competent authorities, in particular with regard to the
outsourcing of critical or important functions. The approach to audit, one aspect that is particularly
difficult to negotiate, would be described in detail, leading to a higher level of efficiency at
institutions and payment institutions when negotiating contracts. Such requirements are already
included in the recommendation on outsourcing to cloud service providers and information and
access rights are outlined in Article 65 CRD. The implementation of these requirements for other
new outsourcing arrangements should not lead to additional material costs, in particular if the
scope of such a requirement is restricted to a subset of outsourcing arrangements; instead it would
ensure that outsourced activities can be monitored, audited and supervised.
Option B has been retained.
9) Guidelines for competent authorities
Competent authorities already supervise outsourcing arrangements under the SREP guidelines for
institutions and as part of other supervisory processes for payment institutions.
Option A: the guidelines should provide a detailed procedural framework for supervision by
competent authorities, including the timing of procedures and the need to assess new critical and
important outsourcing arrangements before they are implemented.
Option B: the guidelines should ensure that competent authorities are appropriately informed of
outsourcing arrangements, but would leave the setting of detailed supervisory procedures to the
competent authority.
An assessment of outsourcing arrangements by competent authorities before their implementation
(Option A) might lead to additional costs at institutions and payment institutions, as the
implementation of processes could be delayed. Competent authorities would need to have
additional staff resources to ensure a timely assessment.
Option B is sufficient, as the SREP is already harmonised within the EBA guidelines. For payment
institutions, competent authorities are already informed about the outsourcing of payment
services. However, given the periodicity of the SREP, additional information on new critical or
important outsourcing arrangements, while carrying low additional costs, ensures that competent
authorities can effectively supervise institutions and the concentration of outsourcing at service
providers.
Option B has been retained.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
E. Cost-benefit analysis
The guidelines impose a limited set of specific requirements on institutions, payment institutions
and competent authorities under the already existing framework, providing clarification and
procedural guidance.
A higher level of clarity on outsourcing requirements benefits institutions by creating a higher level
of transparency regarding regulatory requirements and supervisory expectations. Standardised
requirements lead to a reduction in costs for implementing processes, in particular when assessed
on a consolidated basis.
Harmonisation should increase the efficiency of supervision. In particular, the identification and
supervision of concentration risks by competent authorities may have a positive effect on the
stability of the financial markets. However, this means that competent authorities will have to
assign more resources to the supervision of such risk concentrations and/or may have one-off IT
costs for establishing databases and inputting data to better track such concentrations. Those costs
should be limited, as, on a risk-based approach, such measures should be limited to critical or
important outsourcing.
The guidelines aim to ensure that institutions and payment institutions cannot become empty
shells; this additional assurance protects the level playing field within the EU/EEA.
However, the guidelines will trigger some implementation costs for institutions (credit institutions
and investment firms) and payment institutions, which will differ depending on their nature:
a. For payment institutions and investment firms subject to the CRD, considering that the
sectoral directives already establish a set of requirements for outsourcing that is quite
detailed, the additional costs should be very low.
b. For credit institutions subject to the CRD, a detailed framework exists regarding their
investment and payment services and activities. Regarding banking activities, the previous
CEBS guidelines form the basis of the EBA guidelines and therefore the additional costs
triggered by the guidelines should be low overall.
For institutions and payment institutions, the guidelines may require an update of the current
internal documentation, as well as the implementation and maintenance of a formal register in the
form of a database. Some minor one-off costs may be triggered by the need to update outsourcing
policies and to establish the register of all outsourcing arrangements (e.g. in terms of the additional
data input on top of existing internal documentation). The overall impact is considered low, as
institutions and payment institutions must already have documentation in place regarding their
organisational structure, which includes outsourcing arrangements. Moreover, a formal register
with minimum requirements will also be beneficial to the management of outsourcing
arrangements and will improve the identification of risk concentrations on a micro and macro level.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
The assessment of the criticality or importance of outsourcing arrangements by institutions subject
to the CRD is also a requirement to consider. The criteria are consistent with other legislation in
place; therefore, the additional costs are considered to be low. In addition, the guidelines provide
clarity and harmonised criteria that need to be implemented by all institutions and payment
institutions (i.e. not only by institutions subject to the CRD). The clear difference in the
requirements for outsourcing critical or important functions and for other outsourcing
arrangements benefit institutions and payment institutions in terms of the allocation of internal
resources. The guidelines provide clear criteria to identify a function as critical or important,
including where a defect or failure materially impairs the activities and financial performance. This
is more evident for core business lines and critical functions already defined by the other legislation
in place. Most institutions and payment institutions should have such processes in place regarding
their investment and payment services and activities and, therefore, the roll out to banking
activities should not be complex. The additional clarity, the protection of the level playing field and
the proportionality of requirements all benefit the institutions and payment institutions. Therefore,
the additional costs should be very low and should mainly be one-off costs for implementing the
procedures needed. Given the existing procedures and the consistency with the other legislation
that is already in place, the cost for applying new, more harmonised, procedures in the area of
banking activities should be low. The risk assessment of outsourcing arrangements needs to include
a more thorough assessment of the operational risks. The assessment of whether a function or part
thereof is outsourced on a recurrent basis is a task already conducted on an ongoing basis. The
identification of concentration risks caused by the outsourcing of multiple functions to one service
provider may create additional, although low, costs, but only if this is not already part of the regular
assessment of operational risk and concentration risk.
The guidelines provide clarification on the treatment of the outsourcing of functions by institutions
and payment institutions when considered at the group level and when taking into account the
possible interlinkages between operational risks. All institutions and payment institutions should
already be familiar with risk assessments; all should already conduct scenario analyses at the
individual and group levels and perform such risk assessments in line with other legislation and
other EU guidelines, as they are obliged to manage all of their risks. Therefore, there are low
additional costs for institutions and payment institutions.
Clear contractual requirements, including requirements to assure access and audit rights, lead to
minor one-off costs and reduce the ongoing costs for negotiating outsourcing arrangements with
service providers, as they establish a non-debateable set of contractual conditions to be agreed on.
The clarification of supervisory expectations regarding outsourcing arrangements benefits
institutions and payment institutions during the negotiations of contractual conditions and
practical deliveries and creates a level playing field.
The specification of how audits can be performed regarding outsourcing is based on legislation and
recommendations that are already in place and therefore does not trigger any additional costs;
however, it does provide clarity about the supervisory expectations.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
5.2 Feedback on the public consultation
1. The EBA conducted a consultation on the draft guidelines on outsourcing over a three-
month period, ending on 24 September 2018; a public hearing was held on 4 September 2018.
During the consultation period, the EBA, together with the chair of the EBA’s Subgroup on
Remuneration and Governance, had meetings with some significant European Associations (the
European Banking Federation, the European Association of Co-operative Banks and the European
Savings and Retail Banking Group) to discuss their concerns. Altogether, 59 responses were
received, including the response of the EBA’s Banking Stakeholder Group and nine responses that
have not been published.
2. While many respondents acknowledged the efforts undertaken by the EBA to update the
outsourcing guidelines and to integrate the EBA’s recommendation on outsourcing to cloud service
providers, several respondents made suggestions to reduce the scope of the guidelines and the
regulatory burden that allegedly would be created by them. The main topics commented on are
summarised below.
Main comments received during public consultation
Scope, definition and date of application
3. Respondents commented that the guidelines’ scope of application and the definition of
outsourcing were too wide. First, respondents required confirmation that the guidelines do not
apply to subsidiaries that are themselves not subject to CRD on a solo basis, but only on a
consolidated basis. In particular, the situation of alternative investment funds (AIFs), undertakings
for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) and third-country subsidiaries should be
clarified. Regarding the definition, many respondents provided examples of arrangements that
should not be considered as outsourcing and requested the inclusion of a (non-exhaustive) list of
arrangements that should not be considered as outsourcing in the guidelines.
4. Respondents also considered that the draft guidelines were too far-reaching, as they
extend to arrangements that are not critical or important. They found it too burdensome that the
risk assessment and due diligence provisions were in fact applicable to all third-party arrangements.
Respondents suggested that the focus be only on the outsourcing of critical and important
functions.
5. Respondents considered that the provisions regarding the transitional period were too
restrictive. Respondents urged for existing contracts to be exempted from the scope of the new
guidelines and for the end date of the transitional period to be postponed.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Proportionality and group application
6. Respondents found that the principle of proportionality had not sufficiently been taken into
consideration and that the guidelines were in general too prescriptive. It was suggested that a more
risk-based approach should be implemented.
7. Respondents felt that intragroup outsourcing, outsourcing within institutional protection
schemes and cooperative networks, and the inherent lower level of operational risks due to the use
of common service providers were not sufficiently considered; respondents suggested that lighter
requirements be applied in relation to several matters (e.g. governance requirements, conflicts of
interest, pre-outsourcing analysis, monitoring and audit requirements, exit rights, business
continuity planning, documentation and notification, compliance and reporting obligations).
Contractual arrangements
8. Respondents found the contractual requirements too demanding and specific. They
requested that a more principle-based approach be adopted and pointed out that certain
expectations would raise significant legal and practical challenges, e.g. the inclusion of audit and
access rights and the approach to sub-outsourcing that would trigger additional documentation
and monitoring burdens.
Outsourcing to cloud service providers
9. Respondents suggested that the consideration of cloud services as outsourcing should
follow the same principles as other services and technologies and determining whether they should
be qualified as important or critical functions should depend on the nature of the activities
outsourced. Other respondents would prefer to maintain the recommendation on outsourcing to
cloud service providers.
Information to competent authorities
10. Regarding the information to be provided to competent authorities, respondents
considered that the requirements were burdensome and sometimes had limited supervisory
usefulness; this concerns the documentation of all, and not only critical and important, outsourcing
arrangements and the need to notify competent authorities of new planned critical or important
outsourcing arrangements. In addition, respondents highlighted that the requirement to inform
competent authorities about outsourcing arrangements should be removed or converted into an
ex post notification and requested confirmation that this is not to be seen as a prior authorisation
procedure. Respondents also requested that the register of outsourcing arrangements be limited
to critical or important functions.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
The EBA’s update of the guidelines
11. The EBA has taken into account and provided detailed feedback on the comments received
during the public consultation. The following table provides a summary of the responses to the
consultation and of the EBA’s analysis.
12. Overall, the guidelines have been reviewed to provide better differentiation between the
requirements for the outsourcing of critical and important functions, to which a stricter framework
applies, and for other, non-material, outsourcing.
13. The guidelines have been restructured to better mirror the MiFID II approach that (1)
defines outsourcing, (2) defines critical and important functions and (3) sets out the requirements
for institutions when outsourcing such functions. Considering the general governance
requirements for institutions, the requirements for outsourcing of non-critical or non-important
functions have been retained in a proportionate manner.
14. The guidelines have been checked for consistency with the EBA recommendation on
outsourcing to cloud service providers and the PSD2 requirements on outsourcing.
15. It should be noted that, in general, all of the content of the recommendation on
outsourcing to cloud service providers has been retained; however, changes to the approach have
been made to ensure consistency with the overall outsourcing framework, which differentiates
between the requirements for critical and important outsourcing and those for other, non-material,
outsourcing arrangements.
16. The application of the requirements in the context of a group and an institutional
protection scheme have been clarified. While the context of groups and institutional protection
schemes needs to be taken into account, all institutions remain responsible for compliance with
regulatory requirements.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Summary of responses to the consultation and of the EBA’s analysis
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
General comments
Subject matter, scope and definitions
Some respondents took the view that EBA alone does not have
the mandate to set up rules that applied on a (sub-) consolidated
Article 74 CRD requires that the EBA develop guidelines on
basis, given that its mandate and expertise is restricted to
governance; this includes developing guidelines on outsourcing.
banking business models. It has been proposed that cooperation
The guidelines take into account other relevant European
be established between all European Supervisory Authorities to
legislation. There is close cooperation between all three
Mandate ensure a proportional approach to different businesses. No change
European Supervisory Authorities.
One respondent commented that extending the CRD rules to The guidelines are in line with Article 109 CRD, which requires
subsidiaries that are subject to sector-specific rules, for which that governance requirements be applied on a sub-consolidated
the EBA has no competence, is an infringement of the EBA’s legal and a consolidated basis.
mandate.
The EBA can base its guidelines only on the current applicable
A few respondents suggested that upcoming regulatory changes
Regulatory changes EU legal framework. When new directives or regulations are No change
(CRD V, CRR2, investment firms) should be taken into account.
adopted, the EBA will review its guidelines where necessary.
Empty shell One respondent asked for a more detailed explanation of when Please refer to the EBA opinion on issues related to the
No change
an institution is regarded as an ‘empty shell’. departure of the United Kingdom from the EU.
Implementation across A few respondents asked for clarification on how the In general, Member States should implement the specific No change
preferential treatment of intragroup structures is applied across requirements regarding the group application in line with
Member States
different regulated jurisdictions (in and outside the EU). Article 109 CRD. However, some Member States may impose
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
additional requirements, as the guidelines are subject to a
comply or explain approach.
Some respondents requested that additional definitions be
The guidelines should not duplicate definitions that are already
added to the guidelines that are already included in other
Definitions in force and included in Level-1 text (e.g. in the CRD, CRR or No change
directives or regulations (e.g. definitions of institution, credit
PSD).
institution, etc.)
Many respondents highlighted that the guidelines should
maintain sufficient flexibility for EU institutions to react and The principle of proportionality applies to the CRD, CRR and PSD
adapt to market innovations and should not introduce and to all of the EBA guidelines. The guidelines provide further
burdensome requirements or restrictions, which could criteria for the application of this principle to ensure the No specific
potentially reduce competition and/or increase the costs consistent application of regulatory requirements. change; the
associated with the supply of services to institutions. guidelines have
Prescriptiveness The guidelines specify the requirements set out under Level-1
been clarified
text and therefore should clarify, with sufficient detail, how the
Respondents suggested that the guidelines should differentiate where
requirements are to be applied in a consistent way.
between regulatory requirements (which are mandatory) and appropriate
guidance (which allows flexible and proportionate application). Please refer to the impact assessment included in this
Overall, it was suggested that the level of detail of the guidelines document.
be reduced.
Some respondents expressed concerns regarding the general
Cloud outsourcing follows the same assessment approach as The guidelines
assumption of the guidelines that every cloud solution is
Cloud other arrangements with service providers, taking into account have been
considered as critical or important, rather than each being
cloud specificities. clarified
examined on a case-by-case basis.
Please refer to the EBA opinion on issues related to the
Some respondents requested more flexibility, in particular due
departure of the United Kingdom from the EU. The EBA is bound
Brexit to Brexit and the potential increase of third-country service No change
to apply and implement the applicable EU legislation, including
providers.
with regard to third countries.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Some respondents suggested that the references to the GDPR
The guidelines
be merged or reduced, or commented that the guidelines The EBA assessed the guidelines before the consultation and did
GDPR have been
contained requirements related to data protection that were not identify areas that would contradict the GDPR.
clarified
inconsistent or even conflicted with the GDPR.
Competent authorities and the EBA have no direct role in the
A few respondents suggested that the EBA should work on a
oversight of service providers that do not fall within the scope of
validation or certification framework for service providers, so
their action. There is no legal basis for introducing a certification
that it would not be necessary for several institutions to perform
for ‘approved service providers’.
Oversight of service individual assessments.
The responsibility for the selection of the provider lies with the No change
providers One respondent asked for clarity over the role of the EBA and/or
institution. When service providers fail, and this failure leads to
the relevant competent authority in the event of interruption of
a material impact on the institution or the stability of the
supply or supplier failure of a scheme provider or monopolistic
financial markets, competent authorities will take appropriate
supplier.
supervisory measures.
Respondents found the requirement that cooperation Cooperation agreements with authorities in third countries must
agreements (Memorandums of Understanding; MoUs) be be reliable and effective if functions are outsourced to an extent
signed in third countries too burdensome and a few suggested that would require authorisation or registration.
that other existing supervisory arrangements be considered that Institutions need to be aware of such cooperation
may facilitate cross-border supervision, including supervisory arrangements; therefore, only formal arrangements can be
The guidelines
Cooperation colleges and the idea that cooperation agreements may be relied on. Competent authorities will be required to publish the
have been
agreements between informal. existence of such arrangements.
revised and
supervisory authorities A few respondents recognised the need for Member State To ensure that existing outsourcing arrangements can be clarified
competent authorities to effectively supervise third-country continued, the guidelines have been revised and transitional
outsourcing arrangements of regulated entities, but suggested arrangements have been added.
that the home supervisory authority should maintain and issue
Where subsidiaries of EU institutions in a third country
a list of countries to which outsourcing is appropriate, rather
outsource functions to service providers in third countries to an
than leaving the responsibility with institutions.
extent that would require authorisation or registration,
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
One respondent asked for confirmation that the requirement for cooperation agreements with the competent authority of the
cooperation agreements applies only in the case of outsourcing service provider are needed to ensure effective supervision on a
from an EU entity to a third-country entity, to avoid the need for consolidated basis.
cooperation agreements between supervisory authorities of two
third-country subsidiaries of an EU parent institution.
Some respondents suggested that the specific requirements for
each type of outsourcing (i.e. general outsourcing, outsourcing
Mapping of The guidelines ensure that the scope of application of the
of a critical or important function, intragroup arrangements) be No change
requirements requirements is sufficiently clear.
clarified and that the requirements for each type be compiled in
a specific table or diagram.
Environmental, social A few respondents suggested that the ESG standards to which The guidelines refer to the code of conduct of the institution and
and governance (ESG) service providers must adhere be left to the discretion of the to human rights; institutions need to comply with both, including No change
standards outsourcing institution. if they have outsourced functions.
A few respondents suggested that these guidelines should
require there to be a process for consulting employee Employee representation is set out under national laws. The CRD
Employee
representatives and that institutions should perform an impact includes no mandate to harmonise the involvement of employee No change
representation
assessment on the effects on the employees and discuss it with representatives.
the social partners.
Some respondents observed that the terms ‘electronic money The guidelines
The consistency of and use of wording in the guidelines have
Consistency institutions’ and ‘e-money institutions’ were not consistently have been
been ensured.
used. reviewed
Responses to questions in Consultation Paper EBA/CP/2018/11
Question 1
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
General comments on Some respondents supported the idea of aligning the definition The definition of outsourcing has been fully aligned with the
the scope and of outsourcing with the one in MiFID II; others suggested definition in Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565
definitions different, narrower, definitions. supplementing MiFID II. It would not be practical for institutions
to apply different definitions for different activities (i.e. banking
Several respondents pointed out that the scope of the guidelines
activities versus investment and payment services).
was wider than that of MiFID II, as the strict limitation to critical
and important functions and the explicit exclusion of certain It is the EBA’s view that the definition applies also to parts of
functions (e.g. advisory service, (personnel) training, billing, functions that are outsourced. Such parts of functions are
premises services and the purchase of standardised services) in themselves processes, services or activities that fall into the
MiFID II were missing from the guidelines. In addition, scope of the definition. The additional explanations have been
respondents noted that the EBA guidelines broadened the moved into a different section to avoid any confusion with the
The definition
application by including ‘parts thereof’ in addition to the definition of outsourcing.
has been
process, service or activity, as well as by addressing all
However, other non-material outsourcing arrangements should
revised and the
outsourcing arrangements (i.e. also non-critical or non-
also be managed by institutions as part of their governance
important arrangements). guidelines have
arrangements. Article 74 CRD includes a specific mandate for the
been clarified
Some respondents requested that, for the sake of clarity, these EBA to develop guidelines on governance, including the
guidelines be limited in a proportionate and risk-based manner operational structure of institutions. Outsourcing arrangements
to ‘critical or important’ outsourcing arrangements. Several are part of institutions’ operational structure. Similar
respondents commented that the legal basis for including non- governance requirements exist in the PSD2 and MiFID II. In
critical and non-important outsourcing arrangements was not addition, the EBA is mandated within Article 16 of its Founding
clear. The MiFID II framework limits the requirements to critical Regulation (EU) 1093/2010 to provide guidelines within its scope
or important functions; establishing additional requirements for of action.
all outsourcing arrangements can be achieved at the legislative
The EBA has reviewed the guidelines and introduced, taking into
level only. The EBA therefore would, through these guidelines,
account the principle of proportionality, further simplifications
go beyond its powers by creating new law.
for other (i.e. non-material) outsourcing arrangements.
Application to specific Some respondents requested that a clarification be given The guidelines set out how Articles 74 and 109 CRD and the
The guidelines
firms (central regarding whether CCPs or CSDs holding a banking licence and requirements within the PSD2 are applied with regard to
have been
counterparties (CCPs), MLTFs operated by investment firms would need to comply with outsourcing functions. All institutions that are subject to those
clarified
central securities the EBA guidelines over and above existing sector-specific requirements are addressees of the guidelines.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
depositories (CSDs) and regulations. The respondents suggested that CCPs, CSDs and The guidelines cannot be addressed to service providers that are
multilateral trading MLTFs be exempted from the scope of the guidelines, as not directly subject to the underlying regulatory requirement.
facilities (MLTFs)) and otherwise this could lead to duplications or inconsistencies in
As regards the question of whether the service provided by a
critical infrastructures the requirements.
CCP or being a member of a MLTF is considered outsourcing, the
Other respondents suggested that the guidelines should apply guidelines have been clarified and, in general, this is not the
to all service providers. case. The same applies to the provision of market
infrastructures, even if they are considered critical.
Two respondents highlighted the specific position of financial
market infrastructures (FMIs)/critical service providers (CSPs)
and suggested that FMIs/CSPs should not be subject to the
guidelines, as they are already adequately supervised or
overseen by financial regulators.
Third-country A few respondents were concerned about the extraterritorial
The guidelines cannot deviate from Article 109 CRD, which
application impact of the requirements and suggested that the competitive
prescribes how requirements should be applied on a prudential No change
impact on entities located in, and outsourcing within, third-
consolidated basis, including in third countries.
country jurisdictions be considered.
Definition Some respondents stressed that services performed on the The central performance of a function on the group level may
The guidelines
group level (e.g. a central unit) on a mandatory or optional basis well fall within the definition of outsourcing. In all cases, the risks
Obligations to have been
should not be deemed as outsourcing. In some jurisdictions (e.g. have to be managed. It has been clarified in the guidelines how
outsource amended and
Austria and Italy), the cooperative banks are required to the requirements should be applied in a group and in an
clarified
outsource certain services or processes to the central body. institutional protection scheme context.
Definition The detailed arrangement has to be taken into account when
Many respondents suggested that the non-exhaustive list of
assessing if an arrangement is considered an outsourcing Additional
Examples examples of arrangements that do not fall into the scope of
arrangement. However, a few additional examples that are in examples added
outsourcing should be extended.
general considered as purchasing have been added.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Definition Institutions need to take into account jointly all functions that
Particularly in the context of IT services, respondents
are provided by a service provider when assessing if an
IT outsourcing commented that there are many services that, in a practical
arrangement falls under the definition of outsourcing (e.g. the
sense, would never be undertaken by an institution (e.g. as they
provision of IT infrastructure together with data backup The guidelines
have evolved recently, such as cloud services).
services). have been
Therefore, respondents suggested that, where an IT service is
Even if such an arrangement would not be considered as an clarified
not critical for the provision of continuous and satisfactory
outsourcing arrangement, e.g. as it would simply be the
service to clients, it should not fall under the term ‘otherwise be
procurement of hardware or storage space, institutions must
undertaken by the institution’ under the term ‘outsourcing’.
manage the risks resulting from such a third-party arrangement.
Cloud outsourcing The EBA in general retained the approach taken towards cloud
A respondent suggested that the guidelines be aligned more
outsourcing, but introduced a better differentiation between
closely with the language of the EBA’s recommendations on
the requirements for critical and important outsourcing and
outsourcing to cloud service providers, so that institutions are
non-material outsourcing, which also applied to cloud The guidelines
assured that they can continue to follow the existing regime. outsourcing arrangements. have been
Some respondents requested that the approach towards cloud In a few areas (e.g. audit rights and documentation), further clarified
outsourcing be reviewed and that a more proportionate
clarifications have been necessary to ensure a more uniform
approach be taken; in particular, a differentiation between
application in line with supervisory expectations and the general
material and non-material outsourcing was suggested. outsourcing framework.
Payment and electronic A few respondents urged the EBA to exclude payment and
The guidelines allow for a proportionate application of the
money institutions electronic money institutions from the scope of the guidelines
requirements. The proportionality criteria provided in the
(at least in their starting years) to promote start-ups.
guidelines do not form an exhaustive list and payment The guidelines
Two respondents suggested that these guidelines apply to institutions may use additional criteria. have been
payment and electronic money institutions only when they
In addition, start-ups that are payment institutions or electronic clarified
outsource an operational function, in particular providing that
money institutions have to comply with the regulatory
their service through an agent (distributor) is already sufficiently
requirements that form the basis of the guidelines.
regulated.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Other respondents requested that there be a more The provisions within the guidelines already take into account
proportionate approach for payment and electronic money the regulatory framework (PSD2/EMD2). Where necessary, the
institutions than for institutions subject to the CRD. guidelines specify the requirements for specific types of firms.
A few respondents highlighted that the PSD2 needs to be Due to the largely similar framework, it was not considered
considered and specific chapters should be included to highlight efficient to split the guidelines into a set of guidelines under the
the different requirements for the different types of institutions, CRD and a set of guidelines under the PSD/EMD.
which would be required to achieve a proportionate and risk-
based approach and would be in line with recital 10 PSD2 and
recital 4 EMD2.
Paragraph 5 A few respondents suggested that the scope of the guidelines be
limited to critical/important outsourcing agreements, as
otherwise financial institutions could be prevented from
The guidelines have been reviewed, including the definition and
entering into a non-critical/non-important outsourcing
criteria for assessing the criticality or importance of a function, The guidelines
agreement with a service provider unless a contractual right for
and the supervisory expectations have clarified, better have been
the institution and its competent authorities to access and audit
differentiating between the outsourcing of critical or important revised
the service provider was granted.
functions and other outsourcing arrangements.
A few respondents suggested that the definition of ‘critical and
important’ be supported by additional, relevant, non-exhaustive
examples of services that fall outside the definition.
Paragraph 9 Several respondents noted that it should be explicitly stated that In accordance with Article 109 CRD IV, firms subject to the UCITS
Application on the solo investment management companies, which are already Directive or the AIFMD are in the scope of prudential The guidelines
level for firms within authorised under the UCITS Directive or the Alternative consolidation and therefore are covered by the application of have been
the scope of prudential Investment Fund Managers Directive (AIFMD), are not in the the guidelines on a consolidated level, but not on an individual clarified
consolidation scope of application of the guidelines. level.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraphs 12 and 13 The date of application has been changed to 30 September 2019
and the period for transitional arrangements has been
prolonged.
Nearly all of the respondents commented on the date of
application and transitional arrangements and asked them to be Where contracts have not been updated, additional supervisory
postponed. Many also requested that the change of existing scrutiny is needed to ensure that institutions have robust
contracts not be required, as this would infringe the principle of governance arrangements in place.
legal certainty.
In the case of outsourcing functions, which themselves require
The guidelines
Some respondents are concerned that they have to discontinue authorisation, to third countries, the requirement of
have been
existing arrangements, as cooperation arrangements may not cooperation agreements is needed to ensure that the institution
clarified and
exist or cannot be negotiated. can be effectively supervised, which is one requirement for the
transitional
authorisation of institutions.
One respondent pointed out that EBA/REC/2017/03 requires arrangements
that contracts are documented in the register only if they are Institutions need to document all outsourcing arrangements and have been
new or renewed and urged the EBA to align the guidelines with have a register of outsourcing arrangements, as set out in the revised
this approach. guidelines. A register of outsourcing arrangements is needed to
ensure the effective supervision of institutions and to be able to
One respondent considered that two distinct implementation
identify concentrations at certain service providers. The register
timelines for cloud and other outsourced services would be
has been simplified for non-critical arrangements.
costly to implement and suggested that the implementation
time frames be harmonised. The EBA recommendation on outsourcing to cloud service
providers is already applicable, i.e. the time frame cannot be
adjusted.
Definition Several respondents asked for clarification about whether the The definition of the wording ‘critical or important’ is the same
term ‘critical or important’ should be considered as one category as that used under MiFID II, namely it is one category of
Critical or important
function or as two different levels of importance. Respondents requested outsourcing arrangements. The term ‘critical function’ used in The guidelines
a non-exhaustive (negative) list of non-critical and non- the BRRD is a different concept and has a different definition have been
important functions (e.g. market communications). under the BRRD framework. clarified
One respondent asked whether the term ‘material’ has been The term ‘material’ used in previous CEBS guidelines have been
replaced entirely. replaced to ensure consistency with Level-1 requirements.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Respondents requested that the term ‘critical function’ be Some examples of non-critical and non-important functions (i.e.
clarified, as it has a different meaning under various regulations non-material functions) have been added.
(e.g. the BRRD).
Definition A few respondents suggested that any intragroup outsourcing
within a national group or a group surprised by the single The importance of outsourcing arrangements has to be assessed
Critical or important
supervisory mechanism be expressly excluded from the based on the criteria provided in the guidelines for both No change
definition of ‘critical or important function’, as these intragroup outsourcing and outsourcing outside the group.
arrangements are less risky.
Definition A few respondents requested that a reference to any
The comment has been accommodated; however, where
operational task performed by the internal control functions be The guidelines
Critical or important outsourcing of parts of control functions happen, this should be
removed, as this would implicitly require that any internal have been
considered as critical or important if it can impair the proper
control function tasks be considered as critical or important, revised
functioning of institutions’ internal control framework.
which would not be true.
Definition The definition has been clarified. A situations is also considered
Some respondents requested further clarification regarding the
sub-outsourcing where parts of the outsourced function are
Sub-outsourcing definition of sub-outsourcing and suggested that sub-
provided by a sub-service provider. The assessment follows the
outsourcing be clarified as concerning only the service that was
same pattern as the assessment of institutions’ arrangements
delegated and not the governance arrangements of the service
with third parties.
provider or the infrastructures used by it.
Sub-outsourcing can change the risk and reliability of The guidelines
Some respondents suggested that any requirements regarding
outsourcing arrangements. Therefore, the institutions must have been
sub-service providers be deleted and that the institutions’
have a say and be aware of such arrangements, in particular revised
responsibility be limited to their direct counterparties or at least
regarding critical or important outsourcing arrangements, while
that the requirements be limited to critical or important
the initial service provider also has monitoring obligations. The
outsourcing arrangements. Other respondents requested that
institution remains fully responsible for the function and
the definition be limited to services relevant for the outsourced
compliance with regulatory requirements in the case of
function.
outsourcing and sub-outsourcing.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Some respondents proposed that the guidelines should clearly Sub-outsourcing along the chain of service providers is not
state where multi-level sub-outsourcing is allowed and where it limited, as long as the conditions of the guidelines and the
is limited to one level of sub-outsourcing. contract between the institution and the service provider are
met.
Definition One respondent asked for clarification regarding whether a
Branches are non-independent parts of an institution and
branch is considered a service provider when providing a service No change
Service provider therefore services provided by a branch are not outsourcing.
to another branch within the institution.
Definition The guidelines do not restrict or promote the outsourcing of
Respondents, while pointing out that cloud outsourcing and the
certain IT structures or technologies. It was decided that the EBA
Cloud types of it are defined terms, urged the EBA to take a more
recommendations on outsourcing to cloud service providers
technologically neutral approach so that the guidelines would be
would be integrated into the general outsourcing framework.
capable of including new or emerging IT services.
Institutions should comply with all regulatory requirements,
A few respondents suggested that a lighter framework be
including with regard to their outsourced functions,
created for outsourcing to ‘multi-tenant service providers’. One
independent of the fact that they may be standardised or
respondent highlighted the need to take into account that many
provided by monopolists. The named service providers are
cloud products are characterised by being highly standardised
currently themselves not directly subject to the regulatory
services, which are offered to a broad range of customers and
requirements set out in the CRD. The guidelines – in the same
undertaken by monopolists (e.g. Microsoft, Oracle and SAP).
way as the cloud recommendation – already include No change
Therefore, respondents argued that it should be acknowledged,
simplifications, e.g. with regard to the performance of audits,
as in the BaFin’s MaRisk, that multi-tenant service providers of
that also apply to the outsourcing of functions to multi-tenant
standardised IT services cannot comply with all regulatory
service providers. However, audit rights are a basis for effective
requirements and a proportionate approach should be allowed
oversight and supervision and so need to be ensured
(in particular regarding access and audit rights and the required
contractually for at least critical and important functions and on
minimum content of contractual arrangements).
a risk-based approach, in particular as it is assumed that
Respondents also noted that the guidelines’ requirements institutions will progressively use cloud and other IT solutions.
relating to cloud services are generally ICT specific and therefore
The definition of cloud services does not state that all cloud
should not be included in an outsourcing contract solely on the
services are also outsourcing arrangements. However, all risks of
basis that some components are in a cloud environment.
arrangements with third parties have to be managed.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Institutional protection The guideline
A few respondents suggested that a definition of an IPS be
schemes (IPSs) The comment has been accommodated in a footnote. has been
included, e.g. by referring to Article 113(7) CRR.
revised
Question 2
General comment The principle of proportionality needs to be applied based on
A few respondents requested that, throughout the guidelines, it sound judgement and considering the list of non-exhaustive
should be spelled out how proportionality should be applied criteria referred to in the guidelines. Providing detailed No change
with regard to the specific provisions. requirements for each and every situation would lead to an
overly complex, prescriptive and inflexible framework.
Proportionality In line with the CRD (e.g. recital 54 and Article 74),
Paragraph 15 Respondents welcomed the presence of the proportionality proportionality in the area of governance applies with regard to
principle but asked the EBA to provide more clarity on the the nature, scale and complexity of the institution. The criteria
reference to the principle of proportionality, as they deemed the set out in the EBA guidelines include the fact that the group
reference to the EBA internal governance guidelines to be structure should be taken into account.
insufficient, as the proportionality criteria included in these The guidelines on outsourcing further specify how the guidelines
No change
guidelines did not consider the complexity or scope of should be applied. Proportionality does not mean that
outsourcing arrangements. requirements are not applied; instead it means that
Some respondents suggested that outsourcing requirements requirements are applied in a proportionate way.
should not be applied, based on proportionality considerations, However, a differentiation between the requirements for critical
to intragroup outsourcing or outsourcing to monopolists. or important functions and other functions has been made,
where appropriate.
Types of service Some respondents highlighted that there should be a clear The outsourcing institution remains responsible for the
providers distinction between regulated and unregulated service outsourced functions, whether the service provider is
No change
providers, as this would be in line with the principles underlying supervised or not. This aspect will usually be relevant within the
financial regulation. due diligence process.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraphs 17 and 21 See comments on Question 1, paragraph 9. In accordance with
Article 109 CRD , the guidelines cannot deviate from those
provisions. The guidelines apply to subsidiaries, including
Respondents pointed out that the current wording of the
subsidiaries located in third countries that are not directly
guidelines implies that the guidelines have an extraterritorial
subject to the guidelines, but are covered by its requirements on
application; respondents suggested that there should be a
a consolidated basis, i.e. considering that the parent and its
restriction of the scope to the authorised entities located in the
subsidiary would form one single entity. The responsibility to
EU.
implement the guidelines and to ensure compliance with the
Other respondents suggested that the scope of application be guidelines lies, in that situation, with the consolidating
limited to subsidiaries that are themselves subject to the CRD. A institution.
few respondents asked for further guidance on how this The guidelines
The guidelines follow the approach set out within Articles 21 and
have been
principle should be applied to the different risk models of AIF 109 CRD. Therefore, they are applicable on a group level only, if
clarified
managers and UCITS managers. the waivers have been granted. The CRD does not set out
waivers in the area of internal governance or outsourcing for
Respondents highlighted the importance of taking into
institutions that are affiliated to a central body. The guidelines
consideration group recovery and resolution frameworks and
set out how the provisions should be applied in this specific
the implementation of a proper exchange of information
situation where a waiver has been granted under the CRD.
between EU competent authorities and resolution authorities to
establish proportionality (in particular regarding Section 9.2, The existence of recovery and resolution plans cannot lead to a
concentration risk in paragraph 59 and Section 12). waiver of requirements in a business-as-usual scenario.
However, some elements of such plans, e.g. exit plans, may in
some cases be sufficient for the purpose of the outsourcing
guidelines.
Paragraph 18 Some respondents claimed that this paragraph extends the All requirements of the CRD and PSD2 apply to institutions
The guidelines
scope of the guidelines beyond the intention of Article 109(2) subject to those directives on a solo basis. Firms subject to the
have been
CRD, as it requires a solo-level application of the guidelines and AIFMD and UCITS Directive need to comply on a solo basis with
clarified
overwrites the sector-specific rules. their own sectorial requirements.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Several respondents commented that the proposed The guidelines are in line with the CRD provisions. They cannot
requirements on documentation, due diligence, concentration introduce waivers that go beyond the Level-1 or -2
risk and exit strategy would be less relevant or even irrelevant requirements. Institutions have to have robust governance
from an intragroup or IPS perspective. The guidelines should arrangements in place on an individual basis.
recognise that the management of intragroup outsourcing
The management body of an institution always retains the final
should be proportionate to the risks presented by these
responsibility for the institution, including for the appropriate
arrangements. There should also be lower compliance and
management of all risks.
reporting obligations in these cases than for third-party
outsourcing agreements. Intragroup outsourcing and IPS outsourcing can indeed be cost
effective and efficient ways of receiving or sharing services.
Various respondents stressed the importance of acknowledging
Intragroup/IPS outsourcing is not free from risks.
that institutions that are part of certain financial structures (i.e.
groups, IPSs and networks) do have to transfer tasks due to legal, While a higher level of control needs to be taken into account,
regulatory or operational reasons or circumstances; such intragroup outsourcing must also be subject to appropriate The guidelines
Paragraphs 19 and 20 arrangements should not be considered as outsourcing. This decision-making processes. have been
Groups and IPSs would be particularly true in the case of small cooperative banks, In addition, intragroup/IPS arrangements must be documented; revised and
which are either affiliated to a central body/institution in this is obvious with regard to recovery and resolution planning clarified
accordance with Article 10 or 113(7) CRR or embedded in a
requirements and is needed to ensure that institutions can be
network.
sure that such arrangements enable them to provide the
In particular, respondents noted that the services of clearing services continuously to their customers. Potential conflicts of
houses (within the framework of payment transactions and interests must be identified and managed; it cannot be per se
securities settlement), risk models, liquidity management and assumed that intragroup outsourcing is free from such conflicts.
internal auditing performed by the parent undertaking or central
Business continuity plans must cover the whole group of
institution should not be considered as outsourcing.
institutions or institutions within an IPS and must also be
Some suggested that the guidelines should better take into implemented and tested (e.g. by being involved in the central
account the benefits of intragroup outsourcing, the degree of testing of arrangements) by single institutions within the group
integration reached within many banking groups and the or IPS.
complementary measures and controls already required by
The draft guidelines already included several alleviations for
other financial regulations such as the BRRD. For example,
intragroup and IPS outsourcing, and these have been further
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
intragroup risk management, measurement, controls and clarified. In particular, the requirements on exit strategies have
internal governance should be recognised in the guidelines. been revised.
Respondents also noted that the parent undertaking, as the
superordinate entity, should implement risk management and
control processes to ensure its responsibility for compliance
with prudential requirements on a group level, which also
eliminates conflicts of interest.
Some respondents claimed that there is no need for a
documented exit strategy for intragroup and IPS arrangements,
as the plans and operational resilience measures cover the
issues in such cases sufficiently.
Respondents urged the EBA to align the requirements with the
provisions of the BRRD and highlighted that intragroup
arrangements should not be subject to replacement tests for
The guidelines have been clarified. Where such plans include
third-party outsourcing, but should be dealt with within the
sufficient exit strategies from outsourcing arrangements, it is
context of shared service agreements, global recovery and
not necessary to define additional strategies for this purpose.
resolution plans. The guidelines should not ignore the
However, it needs to be clarified that the BRRD requirements are
Paragraph 19 requirements for resolution plans laid down in Section A of the Section on exit
tailored for a specific purpose that deviates from a business-as-
Annex to the BRRD and the final regulatory technical standards strategies
BRRD on the content of these plans (e.g. Article 7 of the regulatory usual scenario. amended
technical standards) and should recognise the approved plans. Institutions should also consider in their operational risk and
business continuity management that a failure of an internal
Respondents noted that competent authorities should
service provider may have a material impact on their business
coordinate with the relevant resolution authorities when
activities.
applying these guidelines to avoid duplication of work and urged
the EBA to implement cooperation and information sharing
between competent authorities.
Paragraph 19 Respondents pointed out that the strict application of the Articles 74 and 109 CRD require that there are robust
No change
guidelines in a group context could lead to situations where a governance arrangements on the solo, sub-consolidated and
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Group audit rights subsidiary obtains the right to audit or monitor its parent consolidated levels. This includes the fact that service providers
company. This would contradict the fact that the parent can be audited, even if the service is provided by the parent
company has the duty of oversight over its affiliated entities. institution in the way of a joint audit or outsourcing
arrangement.
Audit functions can be outsourced and the guidelines set out a
range of audit mechanisms that can be used.
Paragraph 19 The guidelines on outsourcing do not intend to restrict
Respondents noted that the CEBS guidelines acknowledged that
intragroup outsourcing, but specify the requirements that need
Group outsourcing the level of influence reduced the overall risk of outsourcing and
to be fulfilled if functions are outsourced, including within
that the new guidelines should not lead to a discontinuity of
groups. Indeed, within a group, the consolidating institution is No change
intragroup arrangements, as this would cause a higher risk. In
responsible for implementing group-wide robust governance
addition, respondents highlighted that outsourcing to the lead
arrangements. However, this does not replace the
institution is a crucial part of the steering function in a group.
responsibilities of individual institutions.
Some respondents suggested that paragraph 19(b) should be
Paragraph 19(b) and (c)
clarified, as it could be interpreted that the group has to
maintain individual registers for all institutions for the Maintaining a register is the responsibility of the institution.
The guidelines
competent authorities. Paragraph 19 has been clarified: the register and operational
have been
tasks of monitoring and audit functions can also be provided
Some respondents suggested that IPSs should be mentioned in amended
centrally within a group or an IPS.
paragraph 19(b) (central keeping of the register) and 19(c)
(central monitoring and audit functions) to ensure consistency
with paragraph 46.
Paragraph 20(a) Some respondents commented that the current advantages of The guidelines do not restrict intragroup outsourcing. If there is,
intragroup outsourcing are removed by the guidelines due to the in the specific case in question, a lower level of risk, this will be
negation of the lower level of risk; they suggested that there was taken into account in the risk assessment, even if it is performed
no need to retain adequate competence and sufficient skilled centrally. No change
resources to ensure appropriate management and oversight of
However, institutions and members of the management body
the outsourced tasks as long as the reporting and impact
are responsible for ensuring robust governance arrangements
assessment were fulfilled.
and managing all risks. Without retaining sufficient competence
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
and resources, this responsibility cannot be executed. The
responsibility cannot be delegated, as otherwise the condition
of authorisation would no longer be fulfilled.
Some respondents suggested that consistent terms be used for
Paragraph 20(b) The guidelines
the ‘pre-outsourcing analysis’ throughout the guidelines and
The wording has been aligned throughout the guidelines. have been
that the wording in the paragraph on ‘pre-outsourcing
revised
assessment’ be changed accordingly.
Paragraph 21 Some respondents proposed that, for institutions organised in See comments on paragraphs 19 and 20.
a financial network (within or outside an IPS), a similar centrally
The waiver included in Article 21 CRD and Article 109(1) CRD in
organised regime as for groups, where waivers have be granted,
conjunction with Article 7 CRR are subject to approval by
should be recognised. An IPS is required to prove that there is
competent authorities, i.e. groups can benefit only if they meet
no current or foreseen material, practical or legal impediment
the conditions and the waiver has been granted by the
to the immediate transfer of own funds or the repayment of
liabilities from the counterparty to the institution. Furthermore, competent authority. They do not apply to an IPS. No change
the IPS has to demonstrate that it has suitable and uniform
The guidelines are in line with the CRD provisions, but cannot
stipulated systems in place to monitor and classify risks and the
introduce waivers that go beyond the Level-1 or -2
corresponding possibilities to take influence, providing a
requirements. Institutions, even if they are part of a financial
complete overview of the risk situations of all the individual
network or IPS, have to have robust governance arrangements
members and the IPS as a whole.
on an individual basis.
Question 3
General comments While some respondents were content with the approach taken The guidelines set out the principles and criteria to be applied by
and appreciated that the institution can apply some judgement, institutions when assessing arrangements with third parties. In The guidelines
others stated that they would prefer it if more guidance and most cases and within a concise document, it would not be have been
clear examples were provided. Some respondents provided possible to clearly define examples that, in each situation, would revised and
examples of arrangements that should always be considered or lead to the same assessment results. However, a few more clarified
should never be considered as outsourcing arrangements. obvious examples have been added.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 22 Some respondents stressed that the scope of outsourcing
arrangements is further expanded due to the provision
Criteria to identify
stipulating that, for the determination of outsourcing, it does not
outsourcing
matter whether the specific institution is or will be able to
arrangements
perform the function itself or not. In some structures, the central
institution or specialised entity is set up with the purpose of When a function is normally performed by institutions in general
performing standardised services for the affiliated institutions and is provided by a service provider, the arrangement should
that would not be able to undertake those services by usually be qualified as outsourcing, even if the individual
themselves (due to small banks’ lack of ability to bear the costs institution has not performed it itself or would also not be able The guidelines
or to reach the level of quality safeguarded by those specialised to perform it. have been
entities). clarified
An element of time duration has been added to the guidelines:
By considering it irrelevant whether an institution has
outsourcing arrangements should be recurrent or ongoing
performed that function in the past or would be able to perform services.
it by itself, the number of contracts falling within the scope
would increase significantly.
Some respondents highlighted the need to include an element
of time (duration or continuing) in the definition of
‘outsourcing’.
Paragraphs 22 and 23 The guidelines, via the definition of outsourcing, provide a clear
set of criteria that should be used to determine outsourcing
Several respondents urged the EBA to include a clear distinction The guidelines
arrangements. The criteria have been further specified.
between purchasing and outsourcing, while taking future have been
However, even if something is purchased, institutions are
technological developments into account. clarified
responsible for managing the risks that may result from this
arrangement. This is independent from future developments.
Paragraphs 22 and 23 Some respondents sought clarifications about whether the The guidelines
The guidelines have been amended to take into account the
purchase of standardised/licensed software of services that have been
concept of non-recurrent activities. Purchases of goods
support IT platforms (e.g. web hosting, distributed denial-of- amended
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
service (DDoS) systems, data back-up processes) are considered (including software licences) are not considered as outsourcing
as outsourcing or purchasing. Furthermore, confirmation was arrangements.
requested of the fact that such agreements would not be
Additional examples of purchasing have been added.
considered as critical or important (e.g. the failure of a DDoS
protection system causing the payment institution’s website to However, institutions have to manage all of their risks when
break down). entering into an arrangement with third parties, including the
operational risk of inappropriate or failing IT systems (soft- and
Some respondents considered that services that are performed
hardware), and have to take appropriate business continuity
by all entities and are usually obtained from third parties or are
measures.
not related to a licensed core banking activity or risk
management are not ‘normally performed by an institution’ (e.g.
bookkeeping, tax advice and tax compliance services, statutory
reporting/accounting, custody audits, human resources, payroll
accounting, purchasing computers, infrastructure, tenant-like
electricity or other connections). Supporting tasks such as
administrative or technical functions, e.g. logistical support in
the form of cleaning, catering and procurement of basic services
or products, should also not be deemed as outsourcing.
Paragraph 24 Some respondents requested that paragraph 24 be deleted, as
it would go beyond the scope of the guidelines (in particular for
The approach is maintained, but a closer link to the internal
intragroup/IPS internal purchasing). The requirement to The guidelines
governance guidelines has been made within the guidelines; the
perform a risk assessment or due diligence (in accordance with have been
link with the application of the proportionality principle is also
Sections 9.3 and 9.4) for all third-party arrangements is clarified
further stressed.
excessive and cannot be mitigated solely by applying the
principle of proportionality.
Paragraph 24 A few respondents considered that service providers would no It is not always the case that part of a licensed activity would
The guidelines
longer be able to perform parts of licenced tasks on behalf of require a licence.
have been
institutions without obtaining a licence, which is required for Authorisation requirements are set out within the CRD and clarified
many financial technologies that use ‘white label banking’ (i.e. PSD2. Whenever one of the activities that requires licensing is
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
an outsourcing arrangement with an institution to deliver its performed, authorisation or registration is required in line with
services). the applicable national law.
Paragraph 25 Whenever institutions outsource functions to an extent that
requires authorisation or registration, the function can only be
One respondent requested a clarification on the sufficient steps outsourced to a service provider that is authorised or registered
an institution should take to verify whether a service provider in or otherwise allowed to perform the function within a Member
a different Member State is required to be authorised or State. The wording has been clarified. Additional requirements
registered and whether it fulfils the requirements. apply if the service provider is located in a third country.
The guidelines
A few respondents asked for confirmation that payment Where functions do not require licensing, they can be provided
have been
institutions may involve service providers in offering regulated by any suitable service provider. However, it must be ensured
clarified
services through a system of chain outsourcing that includes that the conditions of the institutions’ authorisation are
non-regulated entities. respected. This also holds true in the case of sub-outsourcing.
Some respondents suggested that intragroup outsourcing be Institutions have to include appropriate checks within their due
excluded from paragraphs 25 and 26. diligence process to determine if the service provider has an
authorisation or is registered. The same principle also applies
with regard to outsourcing within the group.
Paragraph 26 Respondents requested a clarification on who will assess and In the first place, it is the institution’s responsibility to ensure
how institutions should assess if a service provider is ‘sufficiently compliance with all regulatory requirements. Competent
No change
supervised’ and what will be the consequence if such authorities will take appropriate measures if needed, including
arrangements do not meet the supervisory expectations. if they cannot supervise institutions effectively.
Paragraph 26 A few respondents pointed out that problems occur especially in Data protection regulations have to be complied with.
The guidelines
situations where a service provider is located in another state (a Cooperation agreements require that third-country authorities
have been
Member State or third country), in particular with regard to data apply equivalent confidentiality and data protection
clarified and
protection requirements and the exchange of information under requirements. The guidelines have been clarified with regard to
amended
cooperation agreements. the forms of supervisory cooperation agreements expected.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
While respondents agreed on the fact that the home supervisors Transitional arrangements for the existence of cooperation
need to be able to supervise the outsourcing institution, those agreements have been introduced.
respondents complained that the guidelines restrict
Cooperation agreements are required only for functions that are
paragraph 26(b) only to a MoU. Some requested that existing
outsourced to an extent that would require authorisation or
arrangements between the authorities or the cases in which a
registration if the service provider were located within a
service is outsourced but no MoU is yet in place be taken into
Member State.
account.
Paragraph 26 Some respondents stressed that competent authorities should The guidelines
Competent authorities will be required to publish the existence
be required to publish on their website which cooperation have been
of cooperation agreements (MoUs).
agreements are in line with the requirements (paragraph 26(c)). amended
Paragraph 27 If a new activity is going to be performed via an outsourcing
A few respondents commented that, if a function has not been arrangement, the institution must be able to oversee the activity
performed by the institution in the past, it cannot meet the or to integrate, transfer or end it within an appropriate time The guidelines
requirement of retaining the ability to reintegrate the function frame. New activities, even if performed by service providers, have been
or transfer it to another provider within an appropriate time are also relevant for the ongoing assessment of the suitability of clarified
frame. members of the management body and key function holders.
The wording has been clarified.
Paragraph 28 A few respondents suggested that the management body The involvement of the management body is defined within the
involvement be kept at a high level, i.e. the management body CRD and PSD2 and for institutions in the EBA Guidelines on
No change
would participate in the definition and approval of the high-level internal governance. The guidelines on outsourcing are
outsourcing policy and in the reporting of material risks. consistent with those requirements.
Question 4
Many respondents found the requirements on outsourcing
General comments
The guidelines have been revised to focus more on the The guidelines
policy to be too specific and suggested that more freedom be
outsourcing of critical and important functions. However, have been
given to institutions for developing an outsourcing policy
document. institutions need to manage all outsourcing arrangements. revised
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Some respondents suggested that the policy should focus more Conflicts of interest (see also the EBA Guidelines on internal
on the outsourcing of functions that are critical and important. governance) need to be identified and managed. They can occur
at different levels, e.g. group entities, business lines or economic
Some respondents found the conflict of interest requirements
interests of members of the management body or staff.
(in particular in group situations) to be not sufficiently clear (e.g.
‘material conflict’). Institutions should also take into account their business needs
and the costs and benefits of outsourcing arrangements.
A few respondents suggested that the economic aspect (e.g.
However, the present guidelines focus on the prudential aspects
cost-effectiveness, reduction of risks) be taken into account by
of outsourcing arrangements.
including provisions regarding a cost-benefit analysis.
The term ‘policy’ is based on substance rather than form; it does
One respondent requested a clarification on whether the term
not matter if there is one document or if overall appropriate
‘policy’ refers to a physical document or to frameworks and
policies are in place.
standards (i.e. a broader definition).
Institutions as service Some respondents highlighted that these guidelines do not The guidelines deal with outsourcing by institutions. Institutions
providers address the specific case whereby the institution is the service can also be service providers and, in this role, are required to No change
provider and urged the EBA to provide guidance for it. comply with all regulatory and contractual obligations.
Outsourcing policies for One respondent noted that Articles 19 and 20 PSD2 and the EBA
payment and electronic Guidelines on the security measures for operational and security The guidelines are in line with Articles 19 and 20 PSD2 and set
money institutions risks of payment services under the PSD2 already provide out further guidance on the supervisory expectations of No change
sufficient requirements regarding payment and electronic outsourcing arrangements.
money institutions.
Paragraph 28 One respondent asked who is considered the responsible Each institution is responsible for the management of its
‘management body’ (e.g. for resolving conflict of interests) in the outsourcing arrangements and conflicts of interest, even if some
No change
case of multiple group members using the same intragroup operational tasks are performed centrally. On a consolidated
service provider. level, this responsibility is with the EU parent institution.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 28(e) A few respondents commented that day-to-day management is, The guidelines
by definition, a senior management task and not the The comment has been accommodated. have been
responsibility of the management body. amended
Paragraph 30 Some respondents considered that establishing a new function The guidelines require that at least one person should be
or key function holder would involve significant effort and be a responsible for managing outsourcing arrangements or for
burden (in terms of cost and time) and suggested that, instead, establishing a function. This will depend on the size of the
this responsibility should be left to the institution. Some institution and the number and materiality of outsourcing
suggested deleting this requirement completely. arrangements. It is not a requirement that this person does not
Respondents requested that the principle of proportionality be have other functions, as long as those functions do not conflict The guidelines
applied and that a member of the management body (especially with the person’s role as ‘outsourcing officer’. It is indeed have been
in smaller or non-credit institutions, e.g. payment institutions) possible to assign the responsibility to a member of the clarified
management body.
be allowed to be the responsible person.
Indeed, the management of outsourcing arrangements should
Furthermore, respondents highlighted that outsourcing rules
follow the three lines of defence approach, including, first,
should be in line with institutions’ three line of defence
monitoring by the business, control by the second line of
approach.
defence and, third, the audit.
Paragraph 31(c) A few respondents requested that the term ‘operational’ and The term ‘operational’ is intended to clarify that the
The guidelines
the examples in brackets be deleted due to their implication of responsibility for that function cannot be outsourced. It is
have been
limiting the outsourcing, e.g. for the risk control function to possible to outsource tasks of internal control functions under
clarified
operational tasks and to group structures. the conditions set out in the guidelines.
Paragraph 32(e) Respondents requested that the term ‘fintech’ be deleted as it is The guidelines
‘Fintech’ is a commonly used term that is also used in other EBA
already included in the term ‘ICT’, unless there are specific risks have been
products; it is included in the term ’ICT’.
(then clarification would be required). clarified
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 32(g) Respondents pointed out that paragraph 32(g), in combination
While the requirements of exit strategies have been revised,
with paragraphs 89-91, requires that an alternative service
institutions must be able to ensure the continuity of the business
provider or the ability to reintegrate a critical or important
activities or at least be able to end activities if a service provider
function is needed to ensure comprehensive, documented and
cannot be replaced, the service cannot be provided internally or
sufficiently tested exit plans; however, it is not always possible
the continuity of the function cannot be ensured otherwise.
to meet these provisions. In addition, for critical or important
The guidelines
functions, an exit strategy should not be required. The EBA refrained from providing an exact time frame, as this
have been
will depend on the impact of a potential disruption and the
Respondents highlighted that, in general, the guidelines should amended
complexity of the outsourcing arrangement.
provide more clarity on what an ‘appropriate time frame’ would
be. ‘Going concern’ was added to differentiate the situation from a
resolution scenario, but has been deleted as this may still be
One respondent requested clarification on whether the
relevant under resolution scenarios, where the continuity of
reference to ‘going concern’ relates to situations where a
services is desired.
supplier fails.
Paragraph 32(h) Respondents pointed out that compliance with the GDPR is The guidelines
References to the GDPR have been centralised in the document,
already stipulated by the GDPR itself and is subject to have been
but were retained in the document for the sake of clarity.
supervision by data protection authorities. amended
Paragraph 33 A few respondents suggested that the guidelines should be
The guidelines follow the approach under Article 109 CRD.
restricted to consolidated entities to which the statutory
outsourcing provisions are applicable. Institutions need to ensure that policies are implemented on a
consolidated basis (prudential scope of consolidation). This
One respondent asked whether the application of the guidelines No change
consequently means that group policies should also apply to
on the sub-consolidated level and on a consolidated basis is
subsidiaries that individually are not subject to the CRD,
restricted to licensed entities established in the EU and to whom
including institutions located in third countries.
the statutory outsourcing provisions apply.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 34(b)(v) One respondent stressed that this requirement is burdensome if
The policy should detail the approach towards the management
any minor conflict of interest with third parties has to be No change
of conflicts of interests, including their identification.
identified.
Paragraph 34(c)(ii) Some respondents considered that this requirement was too The policy should detail the approach towards any changes
detailed for a policy noted that clarification is needed regarding related to the relationship that may have an impact on the
No change
the fact that changes should be communicated only where they institution. The policy should be established, taking into account
will have a relevant impact on the outsourcing arrangement. the proportionality principle.
Paragraph 34(e) Respondents asked for clarification on the limitation to critical The guidelines have been revised to focus more on the
or important outsourcing arrangements (at least for outsourcing of critical or important functions. Indeed, the The guidelines
paragraph (i)) and on the required measures an institution guidelines explicitly mention that the policy should differentiate have been
should have in place to prepare for a possible exit (e.g. should between outsourced critical or important functions and other amended
an agreement with alternative providers already be in place?). outsourcing arrangements.
Paragraph 34(e) Respondents stressed that it would not be proportionate to
require small savings and cooperative banks or subsidiaries
The guidelines
within a group to implement exit strategies for critical or
See comments regarding the group/IPS context. have been
important functions such as IT systems. The service providers of
amended
such structures are often owned by the cooperative network or
group.
Paragraph 35 The guidelines have been revised to focus more on the
Respondents asked for there to be a clear distinction between
outsourcing of critical or important functions. Indeed, the
the various types of outsourcing and their different treatments,
guidelines explicitly mention that the policy should differentiate No change
otherwise there would not be any bases for a distinct approach
between outsourced critical or important functions and other
in internal policies.
outsourcing arrangements.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 35(c) Respondents stressed that an IPS’s ownership structure might
differ from that of a consolidated group, in accordance with
Article 11 CRR; therefore, there should be a clarification that
The guidelines
other entities affiliated with the corresponding financial
See comments regarding the group/IPS context. have been
network should be covered, as should outsourcing
clarified
arrangements between the member institutions; more detail
should also be given on the less restrictive provision regarding
intra group/IPS/network outsourcing.
Paragraph 35(d) Respondents suggested that a proportionate approach would Sub-outsourcing has not been excluded, as it has an impact on
The guidelines
exclude sub-service providers or would at least limit the risks and the monitoring of arrangements. The guidelines have
have been
requirements for critical or important functions or for cases been revised to focus more on the outsourcing of critical or
clarified
where data are stored outside the EEA. important functions.
Question 5
General comments Some respondents considered that Section 5 should be clarified The guidelines have been clarified regarding the group/IPS
with respect to intragroup/affiliate outsourcing arrangements context.
and how competent authorities should supervise it.
The internal audit function, in line with the guidelines and the
A few respondents considered that the section on the internal guidelines on internal governance, should be applied on a risk-
audit function should be applied by the institutions on a risk- based approach.
The guidelines
based approach.
Institutions must comply with all regulatory requirements, have been
Some respondents highlighted that service providers, in including with regard to their outsourced functions, clarified
particular multi-tenant service providers, often refuse access to independent of whether or not the service provider is operating
their internal control files and findings, regulatory reports or in a multi-tenant environment. Audit rights are a basis for
intrusion tests due to confidentiality reasons. effective oversight and supervision and need to be ensured
One respondent stressed that the PSD2 framework did not contractually, in particular for the outsourcing of critical or
require any specific conflict of interest requirements. important functions.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
A few respondents pointed out that the guidelines would need The PSD2 requires payment institutions to have robust
to take into account the fact that institutions can also act as governance arrangements.
service providers. Therefore, the different natures of the
Institutions remain fully responsible in the case of outsourcing
counterparties needed to be taken into account and the EBA
and it does not really matter if the service provider is an
should allow a different approach.
institution or not: the same requirements apply. This aspect can
be taken into account in the due diligence process.
Paragraph 37 Conflicts of interest (see also the EBA Guidelines on internal
Some respondents stressed that the assessment of conflicts of
governance) need to be identified and managed. They can occur The guidelines
interest should be limited to critical or important services and
at different levels, e.g. group entities, business lines or because have been
that there were no (or very limited) conflicts of interest in the
of other economic interests of members of the management clarified
context of intragroup arrangements.
body or staff.
Paragraph 38 Some respondents asked for clarification of what is considered a See comments on paragraph 37. It is the responsibility of
‘material conflict of interest’ and a ‘sufficient level of objectivity’ institutions to assess their materiality and decide on and
for the purpose of this paragraph. implement, as appropriate, mitigating measures.
The guidelines
Some respondents stressed that, in the case of Imposing arm’s length conditions is one measure to avoid have been
group/IPS/cooperative structures, the principle of ‘arm’s length’ conflicts of interest, also considering possible recovery and clarified
cannot apply, as the strategic decisions take into account all resolution scenarios. However, synergies within groups or an IPS
parties interests causing no negative influences for anyone. context may be considered.
Paragraph 39 Several respondents suggested that the institution and the
service provider do not have to provide different business The institution remains responsible in the case of outsourcing
continuity plans; e.g. in the case of outsourcing to a data centre, for its continuous operation; it should have a business continuity
No change
it should be sufficient that the service provider establishes a plan and it should ensure that this plan can be effectively
business continuity plan that would then also be accepted by the implemented.
bank.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 40 A few respondents sought clarification of the term ‘severe
business disruption’. One respondent asked for criteria to be
given to assess ‘disaster recovery’ and asked for clarification on
how this differs from a business continuity plan.
Some respondents suggested that backup testing should be
This section has been clarified and amended to accommodate The guidelines
required only when it is appropriate, as some providers do not
the comments and to refer to the guidelines on internal have been
have backup facilities and instead store data on active servers.
governance. clarified
Therefore, it should be availability that is ensured, not the
testing of backup facilities.
A few respondents asked for clarification on the use of the term
‘periodically’ and suggested that periodical testing not be
required, as the costs are very high.
Paragraph 41 Some respondents asked if it is necessary for institutions to
Business continuity plans should take into account the possibility
already have a contract with another service provider on hold
that the quality of the provision of the outsourced critical or
for all critical or important outsourced functions or if such a
important function will deteriorate to an unacceptable level or
contract should be on hold only for the functions bearing
fails.
The guidelines
extraordinarily high risks, or alternatively if a risk-based
assessment with documented contingency plans would be Such plans should also take into account the potential impact of have been
the insolvency, or other failures, of service providers and, where clarified
sufficient.
relevant, political risks in the service provider’s jurisdiction.
Some respondents asked for clarification regarding the
The guidelines do not require institutions to already have
application of a business continuity plan on chains of
contractual arrangements with alternative providers.
outsourcing and asked about a risk-based approach.
Paragraph 42 Some respondents considered that the review of outsourced
activities (including on-site visits) performed under audit rights The management of outsourcing arrangements should follow The guidelines
should not be limited to the internal audit function but should the three lines of defence approach, including monitoring by the have been
be set on an instructional level, allowing specialised (second or business, control by the second line of defence and audit. clarified
third line of defence) functions (e.g. IT, legal, compliance, etc.),
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
outsourced specialists (e.g. third-party certifications, external The guidelines focus on the third line, as it is the one usually in
auditors, etc.) or a combination of the above to undertake them charge of audit. This is independent of ongoing monitoring
on a risk-based approach. activities that are also required.
The third line of defence should, on a risk-based approach, visit The guidelines specify that the internal audit function should
critical or important service providers, ensuring in particular that perform its tasks taking into account a risk-based approach.
the guidelines’ provisions are met; this is currently the
Even if service providers do have an internal audit function,
responsibility of a mix of all three lines of defence.
institutions cannot exclusively rely on it on an ongoing basis, at
least for critical or important functions. Institutions are the ones
Some respondents stressed that there should be a reference to
subject to the regulatory requirements (see the section on audit
pooled audits and third-party certificates in this section (with a
rights).
reference to paragraphs 74 and 75) and that many service
Payment and electronic money institutions should have sound
providers do have an internal audit function; therefore, it should
governance arrangements, taking into account the application
be clarified that their assessment and outcomes may be used (in
of proportionality.
particular if the service provider is an institution).
One respondent was of the view that payment and electronic
money institutions should not be required to have an internal
audit function.
Paragraph 43 Many respondents considered that full audit rights are
The guidelines have been amended to accommodate the
necessary only in the case of critical or important outsourcing,
comments. Audit rights are needed for at least critical or
as negotiating those rights in all contracts (especially with third-
important functions, otherwise institutions would no longer
country suppliers) would be burdensome. The guidelines
have robust governance arrangements in place. See new
Many respondents sought clarification on how audit rights may Section 13.3 on audit and access rights. have been
effectively be enforced if the contractual rights are denied by clarified
The guidelines have been revised to allow for a more principle-
predominant providers. Therefore, it was suggested that
based and proportionate approach. Institutions should also refer
standardised reports (e.g. ISAE 34.02) be accepted for meeting
to the EBA’s internal governance guidelines.
the requirements of paragraphs 43 and 74.
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 44(d) Several respondents suggested that the specific reference to the The guidelines have been revised. Implementing outsourcing
service provider’s risk appetite, risk management and control arrangements should be conducted in line with the risk The guidelines
procedure in relation to the outsourced function be deleted. The management framework of the institution and its risk appetite have been
risk appetite of a service provider will differ from that of an and strategy. Internal audit should ensure correct revised
institution (or it will not have one). implementation.
Question 6
General comments Some respondents asked whether or not the register could be
sourced from various data components or if it has to be a stand-
It does not matter whether the register is sourced from various
alone data repository.
data components or if it is a stand-alone data repository, as
One respondent stressed that Annex X is far too detailed.
longs as the information can be provided timely to the
Some respondents suggested that a centralised register for competent authority on request. However, to make it more
cooperative networks without an IPS should be allowed and that effective and to ease the process, one single repository or the
the guidelines should clearly mention that the maintenance of submission of one file to the competent authority would be
the register could be outsourced. more practical.
Some respondents sought clarification regarding the purpose of Annex X has been deleted. The guidelines
the register and how the competent authorities will utilise the have been
The possibility of having a centralised register within groups or
gathered information. revised
cooperative networks/IPSs has been included in the guidelines.
A few respondents asked for guarantees to be included in the See comments on groups/IPSs.
guidelines about any commercially confidential information that
Confidentiality should be ensured by institutions. Competent
may be contained within the register, as very sensitive matters
authorities are subject to professional secrecy obligations.
are covered. It was suggested that the register should be internal
and access to it should be limited. The information required for the register has been reduced and
the focus is now more on the outsourcing of critical or important
Some respondents pointed out that it would be impossible to
functions.
provide all of the information on a sub-outsourcing provider and
that proportionality should be applied.
100
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 46 Most of the respondents asked for the register to be limited to
critical or important outsourcing arrangements. In particular,
respondents argued that the burden is very high for including
unimportant peripheral and substitutable services, compared The information to be provided in the register has been reduced The guidelines
with their low-risk impact. for non-material outsourcing. have been
In the case that all arrangements remain within the scope, some revised
respondents suggested that the information regarding non-
critical outsourcing arrangements be limited to a brief definition
of the outsourced function and the name of the service provider.
Paragraph 47(a) Prudential consolidation means the application of the prudential
rules set out in the CRD and CRR on a consolidated or sub-
consolidated basis, in accordance with Part 1, Title 2, Chapter 2
A few respondents suggested that the meaning of ‘prudential of the CRR. Prudential consolidation includes all subsidiaries that
No change
consolidation’ be clarified. are institutions or financial institutions, as defined in Article 4(3)
and (26) CRR, respectively, and may also include ancillary service
undertakings, as defined in Article 2(18) CRR, established in and
outside the EU.
Paragraph 47(b) A few respondents stressed that providing the legal entity
The comment has partly been accommodated.
identifier or registration number, parent companies and address The guidelines
are not necessary. The information is needed for the register for the purpose of have been
prudential supervision, so no change has been made in that
A few respondents suggested that paragraph (b)(vi) be deleted, revised
respect.
as the data are already required under the GDPR.
Paragraph 47(c) Several respondents suggested that the reference to cloud
The approach to cloud outsourcing has been revised and, for this The guidelines
outsourcing be deleted, as this is against the principle of
specific form of outsourcing, an assessment of the criticality or have been
technology neutrality and would result in unequal treatment importance is required. revised
between cloud solutions and other outsourcing. Therefore,
101
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
cloud outsourcing should be considered as critical or important The use of the term ‘at least’ allows there to be a minimum list
if it is assessed as such in accordance with Section 9.1. of information that institutions should include in the register.
This allows for a level playing field among institutions when they
Some respondents were of the view that the term ‘at least’
are establishing the register and fosters sufficiently supervisory
should be deleted to allow for proportionality.
convergence, while allowing institutions to add additional
Some respondents pointed out that some information (e.g. information for their own purposes.
costs) should not be mandatory, as they are available only on an
The costs should be available and the guidelines specify that
aggregated basis.
they should only be an estimate.
Paragraph 47(c)(i) One respondent deemed that the summary of the risk analysis If the information is already covered by the summary of the
should not be included in the register, as this would already be criticality assessment documented in the register then No change
documented in the assessment of the criticality of the function. institutions may refer to that information.
Paragraph 47(c)(v) Some respondents suggested that these data fields be deleted,
This information should be mentioned in the register. No change
as the audit schedule is part of the internal audit documentation.
Paragraph 47(c)(vi) Some respondents highlighted that this should not apply in a The guidelines
This also applies in a group/IPS context and therefore the
group context and therefore the term ‘where applicable’ should have been
information on substitutability should be provided.
be added. clarified
Paragraph 47(c)(ix) The comment has been accommodated; however, if the
Some respondents asked for the word ‘location’ to be replaced The guidelines
competent authorities requires more detailed information, e.g.
by ‘country or countries’ due to the security risks of disclosing have been
to prepare an audit, more detailed information needs to be
the location of the data centre. clarified
provided.
Question 7
General comments Several respondents stressed that there are too many criteria for The guidelines are consistent with the requirements set out in The guidelines
the assessment of the criticality or importance of a function and the existing regulation and outline the requirements with have been
that several of them are part of the risk assessment. A non- sufficient detail to ensure their application in a consistent way. clarified
102
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
exhaustive list of critical or important services should be The criticality should be assessed on an individual level regarding
provided. the institution making use of the arrangement. For institutions
that are part of a group or make use of intragroup outsourcing
Some respondents suggested that it be clarified whether each
arrangements, the impact of criticality should also be assessed
outsourcing arrangement has to be assessed on the solo and
on a consolidated basis in line with Article 109 CRD.
group levels. As soon as an outsourcing arrangement is deemed
to be critical or important on any level, it should be treated as
such, at least at the level concerned.
Title IV – Outsourcing Institutions should consider whether the service provider is a
process subsidiary or a parent undertaking of the institution, is included
in the scope of accounting consolidation or is a member of or
Paragraph 48(f) Some respondents suggested that the expectations with regard
owned by institutions that are members of an IPS and, if so, the The guidelines
to the pre-outsourcing analysis be clarified when the service
extent to which the institution controls it or has the ability to have clarified
provider is part of the accounting consolidated group.
influence its actions in line with Section 2 of the guidelines. This
section has been clarified and part of it has been moved to the
risk assessment section.
Paragraph 49(b) Some respondents stressed that the draft guidelines deviate
The comment has been accommodated; however, where there
from the requirements laid down in MiFID II and Article 30 of
is outsourcing of material parts of control functions that could The guidelines
Commission Delegated Regulation 2017/565, as they consider
impair their proper functioning, this should be considered as have been
any (full or in part) outsourcing of internal control functions as
critical or important, as such functions are key elements of clarified
critical or important, whereas the MiFID II framework allows for
institutions’ internal control framework.
a case-by-case assessment.
Paragraph 49(c) One respondent proposed that a definition of ‘banking and The guidelines
payment services’ be included, as it is not clear which services A reference to Annex I of the CRD has been included. have been
are addressed. clarified
103
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 50 To limit the scope, the guidelines have been amended to further
clarify that the outsourcing of functions directly connected to
Some respondents proposed that the paragraph be removed
core business lines and critical functions should be considered as
because not all cases of the outsourcing of activities, processes The guidelines
critical or important, unless the institution’s assessment
or services (e.g. some minor support functions) should be have been
establishes that a failure to provide the outsourced function or
considered as critical or important, even if they relate to core clarified
inappropriate provision of the outsourced function would not
business lines and critical functions.
have an adverse impact on the operational continuity of the core
business line or critical function.
Paragraph 51 Some respondents considered that paragraph 51 should be
moved to Section 9.3, as this paragraph is about risk
assessment.
Several respondents highlighted that the list should not be
The guidelines have been clarified in line with the Commission
exhaustive and that the interaction between paragraphs 49 and
Delegated Regulation under MiFID II, which defines the notion
51 should be clarified (both list similar criteria, but
of critical or important functions for the purpose of
paragraph 49 includes classification as critical or important as
outsourcing.
mandatory).
To ensure consistent application, the guidelines provide The guidelines
Several respondents pointed out that these criteria do not take
additional criteria for the assessment of whether a function is have been
into account the specificities of group structures.
critical or important. clarified
Some respondents considered that a clarification was needed
See comment on groups/IPSs.
on how these requirements interacted with paragraphs 49 and
Conduct risk is a subcategory of operational risk and indeed
50. It was assumed that these were additional conditions to
refers to the conduct of institutions, including towards
those in the other paragraphs. However, it was proposed that
customers.
they be merged.
A few respondents considered that the meaning of the term
‘conduct’ in paragraph 51(b)(iii) should be clarified (as it could
related to customers, capital markets or employees, or others).
104
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 51(a) Some respondents suggested that the wording ‘directly linked’
The comment has been accommodated.
be changed to ‘directly connected’ to reduce the scope.
One respondent suggested that additional criteria for payment Institutions, when assessing whether or not an outsourcing The guidelines
arrangement is critical or important, i.e. whether it concerns a
and electronic money institutions not be included, as have been
critical or important function, should take into account the
Article 19(2) PSD2 already provides sufficient criteria. In amended
criteria, meaning that the application of the principle of
particular, the requirements of paragraph 51(b)(i) would not
proportionality is also considered.
allow a proportionate approach.
Paragraph 51(e) Some respondents pointed out that this criterion should not
apply on a group level, because it would lead to a situation in Institutions are required to manage their risks also on a
which several small outsourcing arrangements that were all non- consolidated basis. This criterion should be applied on both the No change
critical or non-important for each group member were individual and the group levels.
considered on aggregated bases.
Paragraph 51(g) A few respondents suggested that it be clarified that the
assessment of scalability should focus on unexpected changes to The scalability is linked to the fact that an outsourcing
No change
the contract, which may result in a significant risk increase in agreement might become critical or important over time.
connection with the outsourcing arrangement.
Paragraph 52 A few respondents suggested that this paragraph be deleted
because the paragraph 51 would already sufficiently address the The guidelines have been clarified and this paragraph has been The guidelines
required quantification; respondents also commented that deleted. Further guidelines have been included in the section on have been
substitutability is not a relevant factor for the assessment of exit strategies. amended
criticality.
Question 8
105
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Many respondents asked for clarification on whether or not the
General comments due diligence process applies to all outsourcing arrangements or
only to the critical or important arrangements.
Some respondents highlighted that there is not always a need Institutions and payment institutions should ensure in their
for a due diligence process, or at least not on an individual basis selection and assessment process that the service provider is
for all institutions. suitable.
It was suggested that the competent authorities perform this Therefore, for all outsourcing arrangements to service providers,
task by supervising the service providers or issuing quality labels a due diligence process is required. This process can in some
or certifications. Another suggestion was that the EBA issue cases, e.g. within a group or IPS, be quite simple and should be
certification schemes in line with the Commission Working performed in any case on a risk-based approach, i.e. taking into
Group on cloud security certification schemes. account the criticality of the function.
The guidelines
Some respondents pointed out that the due diligence process, The due diligence section focuses on the outsourcing of have been
or at least some criteria of it, would not be necessary for functions that are critical or important. amended and
intragroup outsourcing, as it would be redundant when clarified
Institutions are and remain fully responsible for the outsourced
adequate governance was set up and would sometimes be
function and for performing the due diligence process. It is not
dependent on the outsourcing arrangement itself, such as the
to the responsibility of competent authorities to perform the
service provider’s business model, nature, scale, complexity and due diligence process, as they are not responsible for the
financial situation. Particularly in the case of an IPS or a
supervision of service providers.
cooperative network, it would simply be a formal process, as the
At the group/IPS level, the due diligence process should be
centralised entities are set up for the main purpose of providing
performed; however, it can be done centrally. See group/IPS
the specific services and therefore the ability, capacity,
section.
resources and organisational structure are tailored to the needs
and features of the members. Therefore, in such cases,
institutions should be exempted from the due diligence
requirement.
Paragraph 53 One respondent considered that institutions should also ensure
All this should be covered in the due diligence process, which
that the service provider has appropriate and sufficient No change
refers to the appropriateness of IT resources.
‘infrastructure, in particular software, systems, etc.’.
106
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraphs 54 and 55 A few respondents sought clarification on how the service
The nature of a service provider (e.g. regulated or unregulated),
provider’s nature, scale and complexity provides information on
its size and the type of services it provides can give useful and No change
its ability and suitability to perform the service and what to
effective information on the risks that an institution may face.
consider as its ‘nature’.
Some respondents pointed out that, despite the importance of
Paragraph 56 The guidelines refer to the code of conduct of the institution and
the ESG factors, no agreed taxonomy exists and guidance on
to human rights; institutions need to comply with both, even if
how to integrate them into outsourcing arrangements would be they have outsourced functions. No change
more appropriate than simply mandating specific standards
The framework for sustainable finance, including ESG factors,
that may not be suitable for the service to be provided each
will be developed in more detail in the future.
time.
Question 9
Section 9.3 Some respondents commented that the risk assessment section
could better differentiate between requirements for critical or
General comments Institutions should assess the risk before entering into an
important outsourcing arrangements and for non-critical
outsourcing arrangement and, in particular, should assess the
Paragraph 57 arrangements.
criticality of the function. A risk assessment is needed for all
A few respondents felt that the risk assessment requirements outsourcing arrangements, even if in some cases it might be
were too demanding and not tailored to intragroup outsourcing trivial.
arrangements. No change
At the group/IPS level, the risk assessment can be done centrally,
but institutions remain responsible for the decision to enter into
A few respondents highlighted that it could be difficult for
institutions to perform the risk assessment of sub-outsourcing the outsourcing arrangement. See section on groups/IPSs.
activities and suggested entities analyse their provider’s sub-
Sub-outsourcing, in particular of critical or important functions
outsourcing policies to guarantee adequate control of their
(or part of them), should be in the scope of the risk assessment.
risks and service level agreements, instead of actually verifying
full compliance by each sub-outsourced provider.
107
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Paragraph 58 Several respondents considered that the requirement to
perform and document scenario-based risk assessments is too
prescriptive and not proportionate, as it applies to each
The comments have been taken into account and the
outsourcing arrangement. They consider that adequate risk
supervisory expectations have been clarified. The risk
management is also possible without using scenarios of risk
assessment, in particular for payment institutions and small and
events, in particular for non-critical outsourcing arrangements.
non-complex institutions, can be qualitative.
One respondent considered that payment and electronic money
Scenario analysis is an appropriate tool to assess operational
institutions should not apply this requirement for the sake of
risks; sometimes the risk assessment may be trivial and, The guidelines
proportionality and because the PSD2 and the EBA Guidelines on
depending on the scope of the outsourcing arrangement, no have been
IT security do not require the general application of a scenario-
formal scenario analysis may be needed. clarified
based approach to risk management.
The risk assessment should be done before entering into an
One respondent asked for clarification on whether the
arrangement, but institutions should monitor and manage their
estimation of the increase or decrease in operational risk as a
result of an outsourcing arrangement could be qualitative. risk on an ongoing basis, i.e. risk assessments are not a one-off
requirement but are part of the continuous management of
One respondent asked for clarification on whether the
institutions’ risks.
assessment is expected only as part of the decision-making
process before entering into an arrangement or if it should be
undertaken periodically.
One respondent considered that the assessments of
concentration and step-in risks duplicate other regulatory
Paragraph 59 Those risks are relevant for the purpose of these guidelines. No change
requirements that already cover those risks, such as business
continuity planning and recovery and resolution planning.
Several respondents commented that it is not easy for an
institution to assess concentration risk from outsourcing The concentration risk of the institution towards a service The guidelines
Paragraph 59 arrangements to a dominant service provider, as an institution provider should be assessed by the institution in the light of all have been
would not have access to the (confidential and commercial) outsourcing arrangement towards that service provider. clarified
information required to conduct the assessment. This type of
108
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
concentration risk assessment, i.e. at market level, should The register and the information to be provided in it should
instead be the responsibility of competent authorities. facilitate the assessment of concentrations at market level by
competent authorities.
Several respondents considered it difficult for institutions, in
practice, to have access to the relevant information to conduct If part of a critical or important function has been outsourced to
risk assessments of multiple sub-outsourcers. Institutions should a sub-service provider, this means that the institution gave its
Paragraph 60 be responsible only for the relationship with their direct consent and therefore has assessed that the relevant No change
provider, and service providers should be responsible for, or at information could be provided and that sub-outsourcing does
least participate in, the risk assessments in the case of sub- not unduly increase its operational risk.
outsourcing.
Institutions should take measures to protect data in the light of
their sensitivity (i.e. if they are of a personal or confidential
Some respondents asked for clarification on the meaning of
nature). The guidelines
‘sensitivity measures’ and ‘oversight limitations’. One
Paragraph 61(a) and (c) Outsourcing arrangements should not impede institutions’ have been
respondent suggested that the word ‘sensitivity’ be replaced
ability to oversee functions and competent authorities’ ability to clarified
with ‘criticality’.
exercise their supervisory task, i.e. their should not be oversight
limitations.
Several respondents considered that this requirement was too
prescriptive and would significantly increase legal costs and the Political risks are a factor of operational risks and should be
Paragraph 61(d) No change
time to market, without being necessary for the overall risk taken into account
assessment.
A few respondents argued that data protection issues should not Data protection issues are not addressed by the EBA. A
Paragraph 61(d)(iii) and
be addressed by the EBA outsourcing guidelines, but should be reference to the GDPR is nevertheless necessary to highlight the No change
(e)
left to the applicable general data protection rules. applicable framework and clarify the supervisory expectations.
109
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Some respondents considered that this requirement should be This paragraph is obviously oriented towards IT; it does not need
applicable only to IT outsourcing, as it is typically designed for to be clarified further.
services related to data centres.
If specific data protection measures are relevant, they should be
One respondent asked whether security measures should be set mentioned in the agreement between the institution and the
Paragraph 61(e) No change
out and defined in the outsourcing agreement. service provider.
One respondent suggested that, for payment and electronic For payment and electronic money institutions, the EBA
money institutions, this sub-paragraph be replaced with a Guidelines on IT security measures should be read in conjunction
reference to the EBA’s IT security guidelines. with these guidelines.
Question 10
Many respondents asked that the guidelines be shorter, less
specific and more principle-based regarding the contractual The guidelines have been clarified and focus on the outsourcing
requirements. The whole section should apply only to the of functions that are critical or important. However, written
outsourcing of critical and important functions. outsourcing arrangements are required for all forms of The guidelines
Section 10
One respondent considered that frequent use of terms such as outsourcing. have been
General comments
‘should include at the least’, in areas that are relevant to The guidelines require a minimum set of contractual clarified
contracts, could encourage laundry lists and gold plating requirements and leave room for institutions to add further
approaches and may lead to unnecessary friction and contractual clauses as required.
uncertainty during contract negotiations/repapering.
Some respondents asked for clarification on what can be
All forms that are considered as ‘written forms’ under national
considered a written agreement, in particular to avoid restricting
Paragraph 62 law (including electronic forms) can be considered as a written No change
electronic signatures and digital contracting. Making reference
agreement. The guidelines cannot specify this further.
to the eIDAS Regulation would be useful to this end.
A few respondents suggested that standard contractual clauses
It is not to the responsibility of the EBA to define a standard
Paragraph 63 be provided for the supplier negotiation process. Otherwise, No change
contractual clause.
financial institutions may find difficulty negotiating the terms of
110
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
the guidelines with some large suppliers, e.g. the exercise of
unrestricted access rights.
One respondent considered that describing the outsourced
function should not be required for standardised services such A clear description of the outsourced function should be
Paragraph 63(a) No change
as cloud services where service descriptions are usually not provided.
included in contracts.
Some respondents did not consider it necessary to include an The guidelines
Paragraph 63(b) end date in the contract, provided that termination provisions The comment has been accommodated. have been
are included. revised
Several respondents viewed this requirement as burdensome
and costly, as locations can change, especially for cloud-based
service providers. The possible locations (i.e. country or region) should be
One respondent considered that the requirement in mentioned, as this has an impact on the risks. The guidelines
Paragraph 63(e) paragraph 63(e) that the outsourcing agreement must include Institutions need the exact location of the service provision to have been
the ‘location’ where data will be kept presents serious security be able to fulfil their regulatory obligations, including executing clarified
concerns in the context of cloud services, including exposing the audit rights, where needed.
infrastructure and data centre personnel to increased risk of
attacks.
Several respondents viewed this requirement as too broad,
especially as service providers will be reluctant to accept such a The EBA considers that this requirement is fully in line with other The guidelines
Paragraph 63(h) clause. regulatory requirements. The scope of arrangements for which have been
A few respondents suggested that the term ‘unrestricted right’ such rights must exist has been further specified in Section 13.3. amended
be replaced by ‘necessary, appropriate or effective right’.
It should be possible to specify indicators or quantitative and
One respondent noted that it is not possible for each service to
Paragraph 64(b) qualitative performance targets regarding the agreed service No change
define quantitative and qualitative performance targets and level.
111
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
suggested that the term ‘as applicable’ be added to the
sentence.
One respondent considered it inappropriate to impose specific It is not a mandatory requirement to impose insurance
Paragraph 64(e) mandatory insurance requirements on the service provider, as requirements, but, if certain insurance policies are required, this No change
usual insurance policies will be used. should be specified in the contract.
Some respondents considered that no specific clauses in relation
to insolvency law should be included, as general national Ensuring access to data is part of the business continuity
Paragraph 64(h) and (i) insolvency law provisions will prevail over contracts. The EBA measures. The guidelines do not interfere with the insolvency No change
guidelines cannot provide sufficient legal clarity and should only regulation and proceedings.
include a requirement to reasonably address the insolvency risk.
Several respondents suggested that a more proportionate
approach on sub-outsourcing be taken, as this would not
The section on sub-outsourcing applies to critical and important
necessarily create more risks. In addition, respondents
functions that have been outsourced by institutions. If such
considered that requiring a high level of control over sub-
functions or material parts of them are sub-outsourced, the
contractors would raise practical issues, in particular regarding
additional requirements apply. However, institutions may
payment and cloud services. It is indeed extremely difficult for
impose similar requirements also for other outsourcing
an institution to control a cloud service provider’s outsourcing The guidelines
arrangements, e.g. if they assume that the sub-outsourcing
Section 10.1 chain due to its dynamic nature. have been
would increase their risks materially.
Several respondents asked for confirmation on whether the clarified
In any case, institutions remain fully responsible for complying
whole sub-section applies only to the outsourcing of critical and
with all regulatory requirements when outsourcing functions.
important functions.
The liability of the service provider is part of the contractual
A few respondents suggested that the service provider should arrangements that should be agreed between the service
be held liable for any activity performed by third parties and that provider and the institution.
financial institutions should be kept informed of any sub-
outsourcing by the service provider and should be able to swiftly
112
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
exit the outsourcing agreement without cost. In such cases,
institutions should be allowed to relax sub-outsourcing controls.
Some respondents considered that the prior approval
requirement would be extremely challenging to obtain,
especially for cloud or standardised services. It should be
clarified whether the approval is of a general nature or if the
The guidelines
institution should grant its approval to each case of sub- The guidelines have been clarified: prior authorisation can be
Paragraph 65(d) have been
outsourcing. provided in general terms.
clarified
One respondent suggested aligning the language with
Article 28(2) GDPR, which uses the terms ‘specific or general
written authorisation’ instead of ‘approval’, and ‘processing of
personal data’ instead of ‘sub-outsourcing data’.
The paragraph is clear enough and specifies the obligations in
One respondent asked for the expression ‘in particular where’ to terms of the information needed, which aim to ensure that
be removed from the sentence to align it with the cloud institutions can monitor and manage the risks of outsourcing
recommendations and to avoid creating conflicting arrangements where sub-outsourcing is planned or changes will The guidelines
Paragraph 65(e) interpretations. occur. have been
One respondent asked for clarification on whether the service The notification period to be set should allow the outsourcing clarified
provider must inform the institution in all cases of changes to institution and the payment institution to carry out a risk
sub-contractors and prior to the sub-outsourcing arrangement. assessment of the proposed changes before the changes come
into effect.
Institutions have the final responsibility for the function and
Several respondents considered that the right to object should
need to be informed about sub-outsourcing of critical or The guidelines
only be optional, provided that the notification requirement and
Paragraph 65(g) important functions. Where sub-outsourcing occurs, in the have been
the right to terminate an agreement in the case of undue sub-
absence of an approval or no objection (depending on what is clarified
outsourcing are ensured.
agreed), institutions should be able to terminate the contract.
113
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Several respondents requested clarification on whether the sub-
contractor is not and should not be directly engaged with the
institution. If this is the case, the obligations of paragraph 66 The sub-contractor is not obliged to directly engage with the
should be undertaken by the direct service provider on behalf of institution. Institutions and service providers can organise the
the sub-contractor. internal relationships themselves. However, it must be ensured The guidelines
Paragraph 66 Several respondents asked whether the requirements apply to that all regulatory requirements are respected and, where have been
direct sub-contractors or to the whole chain of sub-outsourcing. necessary, audit rights are granted. clarified
In the latter case, respondents consider that it would be difficult The section on sub-outsourcing applies to the chain of sub-
to achieve compliance when sub-contractors provide only small outsourcing providers.
parts of services. The requirements should therefore be
proportionate to the role fulfilled and activity performed.
Some respondents asked for clarification on whether the audit
The audit rights relate to what is relevant for the performed
Paragraph 66(b) and access rights would concern only the elements of the No change
function.
outsourcing that the sub-contractor is actually performing.
One respondent considered that there is an inconsistency
between this paragraph and paragraph 65(g), as the latter states
that institutions have the right to object to any intended sub-
Paragraph 67 outsourcing, while the former states ‘if such a right was agreed’. These paragraphs should be read in conjunction and do not No change
contradict each other.
Some respondents considered that the outsourcing institution
should not have to impose its policy on a service provider, as the
latter should have its own policy.
One respondent asked for clarification on what the appropriate It is the institution’s responsibility to define what the The guidelines
Paragraph 68 security standards are and asked if this could be those agreed in appropriate security standards are; further guidelines will be have been
the contract or if it must be internationally accepted standards. provided separately on the expectation of IT security measures. clarified
114
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
One respondent asked for clarification on the meaning of The word ‘relevant’ means where necessary in the specific case.
‘relevant providers’ and asked if this was synonymous with It is not related to the service provider.
providers supplying critical or important functions.
In the case of outsourcing to cloud service providers and other
outsourcing arrangements that involve the handling or transfer
of personal or confidential data, institutions and payment
Some respondents asked for clarification on what is meant by institutions should adopt a risk-based approach to data storage
sensitive data and a risk-based approach, in particular whether and data processing location(s) (i.e. country or region) and
Paragraph 70 No change
the latter concerns a risk-based approach to locate data centres information security considerations. In this particular case, ‘risk-
or an approach based on country risk. based approach’ means that the risks related to the location and
storage of data should be considered and managed in the light
of the nature of the data (i.e. personal, confidential, non-
confidential, public, etc.).
One respondent suggested that the language be aligned with the
cloud recommendation, in particular regarding the fact that
The guidelines are addressed to institutions and not to service
service providers should comply with requirements regarding
providers. The guidelines recognise multi-tenant environments.
the protection of data that are applicable to them and not with
Paragraph 71 requirements applicable to institutions. When performing audits in multi-client environments, care No change
should be taken that risks to another client’s environment (e.g.
One respondent considered that the guidelines should recognise
the impact on service levels, the availability of data,
service providers’ confidentiality obligations to other clients,
confidentiality aspects) are avoided or mitigated.
security concerns, competition issues (e.g. audits by
competitors) and professional obligations.
Several respondents consider that access rights should be The guidelines
The guidelines have been amended regarding the scope of
Paragraph 72 limited to what is relevant for the function provided and only be have been
functions for which unrestricted audit rights are required.
required for critical and important outsourcing arrangements. amended
115
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Several respondents considered that making arrangements for
physical access to (all) data centres is unattainable and irrelevant Both institutions and competent authorities should have
(as there is likely to be nothing to see or the data are split over unrestricted audit and access rights. This section has been
The guidelines
multiple locations) and that the guidelines should instead focus clarified and sets out the appropriate audit techniques.
Paragraph 72(a) have been
on relevant system information.
Competent authorities have, by law, information gathering and
clarified
One respondent considered that the competent authority’s information rights, including at service providers in Member
access to information should be done via the outsourcing States.
institution and that the authority should not have direct access.
Audit rights for institutions and competent authorities should be
One respondent considered that a service provider should have The guidelines
ensured and should be effective. Where such rights cannot be
Paragraph 72(b) the right to object to an inspection based on conflicts or have been
enforced for critical and important functions, such functions
competition. clarified
cannot be outsourced.
One respondent asked for clarification on whether the audit The guidelines have been clarified. However, institutions cannot The guidelines
Paragraph 73 function of the service provider can also perform the audit if the rely over time solely on the audit reports received form the have been
service provider has a banking licence. service provider with regard to critical or important functions. clarified
One respondent considered that providing complete access to
financial information was not possible for publicly listed service The guidelines do not refer to the points mentioned, but audit
No change
Paragraph 73 providers that are subject to strict reporting and disclosure rules and access rights must exist for what is relevant in the context
and that such a requirement could inappropriately include of the outsourcing arrangement.
information relating to other customers of the service provider.
A high number of respondents considered that, to keep the cost
For the outsourcing of critical or important functions,
of auditing low, especially in groups and cooperative banks, the The guidelines
institutions and payment institutions should assess whether
Paragraphs 74 and 75 final sentence should be removed. have been
third-party certifications and reports, as referred to in
clarified
Shared (pooled audit) auditing or third-party reports should be
paragraph 90(b), are adequate and sufficient to comply with
sufficient if they are reliable and delivered in a timely manner,
116
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
and institutions and payment institutions should be free to their regulatory obligations and should not rely solely on these
decide whether further action is needed. reports over time.
This limitation does not refer to pooled or external audits
commissioned by the institution.
Some respondents suggested that the requirement be deleted, The guidelines
Audits should also be performed in group or IPS contexts.
Paragraph 75(f) as it is not contractually conceivable, especially in groups or have been
See comments on groups/IPSs.
networks. clarified
Some respondents stated that payment and electronic money
This requirement refers only to institutions (i.e. institutions The guidelines
institutions are not subject to the CRD framework for SREP but
Paragraph 76 subject to the CRD), not to payment institutions, which by have been
have their own framework on IT security and thus should not be
contrast should follow the framework applicable to them. clarified
required to carry out security penetration testing.
In severe events and in some cases that depend on the nature of
Some respondents suggested that the final part of the sentence The guidelines
the outsourced function (e.g. cash management services, money
Paragraph 77 be deleted and that the provision be aligned with the cloud have been
transportation), it would not be possible to notify service
recommendations. clarified
providers about audits well in advance.
When performing audits in multi-client environments, care
Some respondents asked for the guidelines to specify what could The guidelines
should be taken that risks to another client’s environment (e.g.
Paragraph 79 be considered ‘alternative ways to provide a similar level of have been
the impact on service levels, the availability of data,
assurance’. clarified
confidentiality aspects) are avoided or mitigated.
Institutions are responsible for performing appropriate audits;
One respondent considered that a single institution could
similar to the review of certifications, participating institutions
Paragraph 80 ensure only its own auditor’s skills, not those of the whole pool No change
can, for example, jointly or by the exchange of relevant
of auditors.
information, validate the suitability of auditors.
117
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Some respondents asked for the guidelines to better take into Even in the case of groups/IPSs, institutions should be able to
Section 10.4 account IPSs and cooperatives, where termination can happen terminate arrangements, e.g. in the case of a recovery or No change
only on the basis of coordinated democratic processes. resolution scenario.
Some respondents asked why the guidelines referenced national
The guidelines have been revised and now make reference to
law when clarifying what is meant by cross-border outsourcing
the applicable law, i.e. this may include national law, governing
arrangements and asked if that law applies to the institution or
law and provisions with extraterritorial effect that have been
to the service provider. Some respondents suggested that the
included in the contract.
governing law of the agreement be referred to instead. The guidelines
The guidelines provide a list of non-exhaustive situations that
Paragraph 81 Some respondents considered that the guidelines should require have been
may lead to the termination of contracts, based on the
that reasonable termination rights be included in the contractual arrangement. clarified
agreement, but should not specify termination events, as some
If institutions cannot enforce contracts, and this leads to their
expectations of the guidelines, such as termination rights in the
non-compliance with regulatory requirements, institutions must
case of a breach of contract or any weakness of IT security, are
not in line with some national laws and would be unenforceable. take appropriate action.
Where events happen that impede the performance of the
Some respondents considered that this provision is difficult to
service, institutions should be able to terminate the agreement,
Paragraph 81(b) obtain from service providers and proposed that this sentence No change
as, due to the inappropriateness of the service, the service
be deleted.
provider may need to be substituted.
The sub-outsourcing arrangements mentioned are only those
One respondent asked for clarification on whether the sub-
related to critical and important functions. This paragraph
Paragraph 81(c) outsourcing arrangements mentioned were only those related No change
should be read in conjunction with the section on sub-
to critical and important functions.
outsourcing.
Question 11
118
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
The guidelines have been clarified. While institutions must
Some respondents stated that it would be challenging to
monitor their outsourcing arrangements, the focus should be on
monitor arrangements and performance on a continuous basis. The guidelines
Section 11 the outsourcing of critical or important functions.
Some respondents considered that the requirements of the have been
General comments Monitoring arrangements with third parties in general should be
section should apply only to outsourcing arrangements of critical clarified
done on an ongoing basis and through a risk-based approach.
and important functions.
See also comments below.
Some respondents asked whether a central monitoring body The three lines of defence model should be applied for the
must be established or if it is sufficient that the monitoring is management, control and auditing of outsourcing
performed by the institution’s area receiving the service. arrangements. The guidelines
Paragraph 83 One respondent suggested that the word ‘ongoing’ be replaced Monitoring should be done on a risk-based approach. The word have been
with the word ‘regular’ and another respondent suggested that ‘ongoing’ stresses the fact that this is not a ‘one-off’ exercise and clarified
a risk-based approach be referred to, especially for chain the interval of monitoring activities should consider the risks and
outsourcing. can range from daily monitoring activities to longer intervals.
The frequency is to be set by the institution and will take into
Several respondents requested a clarification on the expected
account the monitoring results and the criticality of the function.
frequency of updates to the risk assessment.
The comment has been accommodated: the management body
One respondent suggested that the term ‘any risk’ be replaced The guidelines
should regularly receive risk reports regarding critical or
Paragraph 85 with ‘material risk’ and added that reporting should be done have been
important functions.
pursuant to the internal risk reporting governance framework. clarified
Board committees (i.e. risk committees) may assist the
Some respondents asked about the extent to which the
management body in its tasks, but the responsibility lies with the
reporting can be delegated to committees.
management body.
Some respondents wanted the guidelines to specify the
It is the institution’s responsibility to define suitable indicators
Paragraph 88 expected character of key performance indicators and key No change
for the monitoring of the specific outsourcing arrangement.
control indicators.
119
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Question 12
Some respondents asked that it be ensured that the
requirements in this section were consistent with the BRRD.
Several respondents considered that the whole section should
apply only to outsourcing arrangements of critical and important
functions.
Some respondents considered that exit strategies should be The EBA reviewed the guidelines and concluded that they are
required only when the continuity of services is endangered. consistent with the BRRD.
A high number of respondents thought that the requirements of The guidelines focus more on the outsourcing of important or
Section 12 this section should apply only at the group/network level and/or critical functions. The comment has been accommodated. The guidelines
have been
to the central institution in cooperatives and IPSs. Only a pooled
General comments The guidelines provide a list of situations in which exit strategies
clarified
exit strategy should be required.
should be implemented.
In addition, respondents suggested that specificities of
See comment on groups/IPSs. An exit strategy can be defined
intragroup outsourcing arrangements be better reflected: since
centrally.
the likelihood that a service provider inside the group will be
terminated or will fail is extremely low, greater visibility and
cooperation is available and adjustments to intragroup
arrangements are covered by business continuity plans. An
institution may also not be in a position to exit an arrangement
if this would conflict with the group policy or governance.
Several respondents were concerned that the term ‘tested’ The comment has been accommodated and ‘where appropriate’
The guidelines
could be misinterpreted, resulting in a successful transfer or in- has been added; in addition, it was clarified that the actual exit
Paragraph 90 have been
housing of outsourced functions being requested, which would does not need to be tested in terms of a switch to another
clarified
in fact be very burdensome. provider.
120
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
The guidelines specify that alternative solutions should be
One respondent asked the EBA to confirm that institutions are
Paragraph 90(a) identified, but that no requirement exists to have alternate No change
not required to have in place alternative providers.
arrangements in place.
One respondent asked whether the scenario of a change in
The change of service providers may be part of a business
Paragraph 90(b) service provider needs to be included in the business continuity No change
continuity plan.
plan.
One respondent considered that unacceptable service levels
The institution can define ex ante performance indicators. See
that can trigger an exit cannot be determined ex ante in a
Paragraph 91(e) also comments regarding the ongoing monitoring of outsourcing No change
contract. They should also not be considered as the only cases in
arrangements.
which exit from the arrangement may occur.
Question 13
Some respondents considered that there should not be
additional new reporting requirements for payment and
electronic money institutions. Such institutions are already
subject to the PSD2 notification requirements and should not be The guidelines specify that payment and electronic money
required to have a register. institutions already need to document all outsourcing The guidelines
Section 13
Several respondents considered that intragroup outsourcing arrangements. The register should be made available on have been
General comments request. clarified
arrangements should be excluded from the information
requirements. In particular, in IPSs or cooperatives in which a See comment on groups/IPSs. A centralised register can be kept.
high number of affiliated institutions outsource the same
function, providing the same set of information does not have
added value.
121
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Some respondents considered that making a full register
available within each SREP or at least every three years
The register should be available upon request. The contents of
represents a significant volume of information that does not
the register have been streamlined, in particular for non-
allow for risk-sensitive supervision.
material outsourcing arrangements. See also comments on the
A high number of respondents made the following suggestions: register and in Section 11 on documentation.
that transmission be limited when supervisors request an
The guidelines do neither require nor prevent competent
inspection, that a waiver be provided for small institutions, that
authorities from applying a prior approval process for
the scope of the register be reduced to critical and important The guidelines
outsourcing arrangements. Supervision is done on a risk-based
Paragraph 92 functions and that the information required be limited (i.e. a have been
approach and, depending on the size and complexity of
brief description of the function, its criticality, contact details of clarified
institutions, a different frequency for reviews is applied.
the provider), with competent authorities then able to ask for
more details when necessary. Institutions and payment institutions should adequately inform
competent authorities in a timely manner or engage in a
Several respondents asked for confirmation that no prior
supervisory dialogue with regard to planned outsourcing of
approval by the competent authority is necessary for an
critical or important functions and/or where an outsourced
outsourcing arrangement. The requirement to inform
function has become critical or important.
competent authorities about outsourcing arrangements should
be removed or at least changed to an ex post notification.
The guidelines
Some respondents requested that this requirement be deleted,
Paragraph 94 See comments on paragraph 92. have been
since the register would be sufficient.
clarified
The guidelines
Some respondents asked for a clarification on the meaning of
Paragraph 95 See comments on paragraph 92. have been
‘undue delay’ and of ‘material changes and events’.
clarified
Question 14
122
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
These guidelines should be read in conjunction with the SREP
guidelines.
One respondent considered that this section should be
integrated into the EBA SREP guidelines. These guidelines are addressed to competent authorities.
Title V However, references and links to the BRRD framework are given
One respondent wanted to add that competent and resolution
where relevant. In particular, where risk concentrations are No change
General comments authorities, and digital service providers’ supervisory
identified that pose risks to the stability of the financial market,
authorities, should cooperate for the monitoring of outsourcing
the resolution authority should be informed about the new
risks.
potential critical function (i.e. ‘critical function’ as defined under
the BRRD).
Concentration risks within an institution, including on a
consolidated basis, caused by multiple outsourcing
Several respondents asked that the specificities of intragroup
arrangements with a single service provider, closely connected
Paragraph 103 outsourcing arrangements be better take into account, e.g. for No change
service providers or multiple outsourcing arrangements within
the assessment of concentration risk.
the same business area should be considered and assessed on a
macro level by the competent authority.
Several respondents asked for a clarification on if and how
Competent authorities should maintain a dialogue with the
competent authorities would inform entities about their
supervised entities. However, the concentration risk is assessed
Paragraph 104 calculation of concentration risk at a sector level, and what the No change
by competent authorities to identify risks for the financial
consequences would be of evidence of a concentration risk, e.g.
stability; no public communication is required.
in the provision of cloud-based outsourced services.
Some respondents asked the EBA to better describe the
situations in which a competent authority could ask an No further clarification can be provided. The measures of
institution to exit from an arrangement to limit the business risk. competent authorities need to take into account in the situation
Paragraph 105 No change
The requirement to exit should be a last resort and prior steps in question. General principles of administrative law apply. This
and warnings should be defined as part of a supervisor’s policy does not need to be specified in EBA guidelines.
and made public by competent authorities.
123
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
Question 15
Several respondents asked for clarification on whether the
template provided was only an example; respondents asked if The guidelines
The template was not intended to be mandatory and has been
Annex 1 the EBA would explicitly allow institutions to have a different have been
deleted.
structure, template or application as long as it contained the amended
required information.
Question 16
Some respondents considered that the impact assessment failed
to demonstrate that the benefits outweighed the costs. The
latter are underestimated, as the guidelines will trigger
significant financial, IT and administrative costs and an increased
The guidelines
workload in terms of updating contracts, processes and The impact assessment has been updated, taking into account
and the impact
Impact assessment procedures and performing on-going controls. Specific one-off changes made to the guidelines. The impact assessed reflects
assessment
General comments costs identified include the design and set up of a database, the only the costs triggered by the guidelines and not the costs
analysis of all contracts and the drafting of new clauses. triggered by other regulatory products that already exist. have been
updated
Some respondents considered that the assessment
underestimates the resources that will be necessary to maintain
the register for all arrangements and for competent authorities
to process the registers.
This should not have a significant financial impact, as institutions The guidelines
Some respondents considered that extending the risk are already obliged to identify, manage and monitor all of their and the impact
Risk assessment assessment requirements to all third-party arrangements would risks. No sufficiently detailed information was provided by assessment
have a significant economic impact. respondents to demonstrate the additional costs triggered have been
specifically by the guidelines. updated
124
FINAL REPORT ON THE GUIDELINES ON OUTSOURCING
Amendments
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA’s analysis to the
proposals
The guidelines
One respondent found it difficult to understand the choice of
and the impact
Cooperation Option A when the assessment acknowledged the length of The guidelines have been amended to allow for other forms of
assessment
agreements negotiations for cooperation agreements and the impact of this cooperation.
have been
on institutions’ policies and practices.
updated
125